Mr. President, a few days ago, the world watched as the seeds of democracy began to take root in Iraq. As a result of the sheer courage of the Iraqi people and the untold sacrifices of American soldiers, the success of the elections showed just how far people will go to achieve self-government and rule of law.
As Americans, we can take enormous pride in the fact that this kind of courage has been inspired by our own struggle for freedom, by the tradition of democratic law secured by our forefathers and enshrined in our Constitution. It is a tradition that says all men are created equal under the law and that no one is above it.
That is why even within the executive branch there is an office dedicated to enforcing the law of the land and applying it to people and to Presidents alike.
In this sense, the Attorney General is not like the other Cabinet posts. Unlike the Secretary of State, who is the public face of the President's foreign policy, or the Secretary of Education, whose job it is to carry out the President's education policy, the Attorney General's job is not just to enforce the President's laws, it is to tell the President what the law is. The job is not simply to facilitate the President's power, it is to speak truth to that power as well.
The job is to protect and defend the laws of freedoms for which so many have sacrificed so much.
The President is not the Attorney General's client; the people are. And so the true test of an Attorney General nominee is whether that person is ready to put the Constitution of the people before the political agenda of the President. As such, I cannot approach this nomination for Attorney General the same way I approached that of Secretary of State Rice or Veterans Affairs Secretary Nicholson or any other Cabinet position. The standard is simply higher.
Like the previous speaker, Senator Dodd, I wanted to give Alberto Gonzales the benefit of the doubt when we began this process. His story is inspiring, especially for so many of us — like me — who shared in achieving the American dream. I have no question that as White House Counsel, he has served his President and his country to the best of his ability. But in my judgment, these positive qualities alone are not sufficient to warrant confirmation as the top law enforcement officer in the land.
I had hoped that during his hearings, Judge Gonzales would ease my concerns about some of the legal advice he gave to the President, and I had hoped he would prove that he has the ability to distance himself from his role as the President's lawyer so that he could perform his new role as the people's lawyer.
Unfortunately, rather than full explanations during these hearings, I heard equivocation. Rather than independence, I heard an unyielding insistence on protecting the President's prerogative.
I did not hear Judge Gonzales repudiate 2\1/2\ years of what appears to be official U.S. policy that has defined torture so narrowly that only organ failure and death would qualify, a policy that he himself appears to have helped develop and at least has condoned.
Imagine that, if the entire world accepted the definition contained in the Department of Justice memos, we can only imagine what atrocities might befall our American POWs. How in the world, without such basic constraints, would we feel about sending our sons and daughters off to war? How, if we are willing to rationalize torture through legalisms and semantics, can we claim to our children and the children of the world that America is different and represents a higher moral standard?
This policy is not just a moral failure, it is a violation of half a century of international law. Yet while Judge Gonzales's job was White House Counsel, he said nothing to that effect to the President of the United States. He did not show an ability to speak with responsible moral clarity then, and he has indicated that he still has no intention to speak such truths now.
During his recent testimony, he refused to refute a conclusion in the torture memo which stated that the President has the power to override our laws when acting as Commander in Chief. Think about this. The Nation's top law enforcement officer telling its most powerful citizen that if the situation warrants, the President can break the law from time to time.
The truth is, Mr. Gonzales has raised serious doubts about whether, given the choice between the Constitution and the President's political agenda, he would put our Constitution first. And that is why I simply cannot support his nomination for Attorney General.
I understand that Judge Gonzales will most likely be confirmed, and I look forward to working with him in that new role. But I also hope that once in office, he will take the lessons of this debate to heart.
Before serving in this distinguished body, I had the privilege of teaching law for 10 years at the University of Chicago. Among the brilliant minds to leave that institution for Government service was a former dean of the law school named Edward Levi, a man of impeccable integrity who was committed to the rule of law before politics.
Edward Levi was chosen by President Ford to serve as Attorney General in the wake of Watergate. The President courageously chose to appoint him not because Dean Levi was a yes man, not because he was a loyal political soldier, but so that he could restore the public's confidence in a badly damaged Justice Department, so that he could restore the public's trust and the ability of our leaders to follow the law.
While he has raised serious doubts about his ability to follow this example, Judge Gonzales can still choose to restore our trust. He can still choose to put the Constitution first. I hope for our country's sake that he will, and part of the reason I am speaking in this Chamber today is to suggest three steps that he can take upon assuming his role that would help restore that trust.
First, he can immediately repudiate the terror memos in question and ensure that the Department of Defense is not using any of its recommendations to craft interrogation policies.
Second, Judge Gonzales can restore the credibility of his former position as legal counsel by appointing an independent-minded, universally respected lawyer to the post.
And third, he can provide this Congress regular detailed reports on his efforts to live up to the President's stated zero tolerance policy with respect to torture.
Today we are engaged in a deadly global struggle for those who would intimidate, torture, and murder people for exercising the most basic freedoms. If we are to win this struggle and spread those freedoms, we must keep our own moral compass pointed in a true direction. The Attorney General is one figure charged with doing this, but to do it well, he must demonstrate a higher loyalty than just to the President. He must demonstrate a loyalty to the ideals that inspire a nation and, hopefully, the world.
I thank the Chair.

Mr. President, I rise to recognize the life and service of Mr. Warren V. Hileman, who passed away recently at the Illinois Veterans Home in Anna.
Last week, the Southern Illinoisan reported that the State believes Mr. Hileman was the last World War I veteran to have lived in Illinois.
He joined the U.S. Army in 1919, and served with the American Expeditionary Force in Siberia from September of 1919 to March 1920. Traveling thousands of miles across Siberia in temperatures that often reached 30 below, Mr. Hileman and the 27th infantry served long after the Armistice was signed in Europe.
In Posolskaya, their unit was involved in a hostile encounter that later won Mr. Hileman the World War I Victory Medal, which he was awarded in January of 2004.
After the war, he came home to Illinois where he worked in a North Chicago veterans hospital. Later, he and his wife moved back down south to Union County, where they spent the rest of their lives.
Warren was only 17 years old when he first landed in Vladivostok, Russia. Perhaps he was anxious about the war ahead of him; perhaps he already missed the home that lay behind. But above all, he was ready and eager to serve this country. At just 17, he was ready to make the ultimate sacrifice in the defense of freedom.
Today, we honor his service and remember a man who returned from war to live over a century on this Earth. Through more wars and depression, through great advances for civil rights and great struggles for freedom, Mr. Hileman was there — a patriot who had proudly written his own page in the story of 20th century America.
It is said that whether a life is long or short, its completeness depends on what it was lived for. And so, while Warren Hileman left us at the age of 103, the true completeness of his life comes from what he lived it for — for his friends, for his family, and for the defense of the country he loved. May his memory serve as a reminder for all of us to keep faith with our Nation's veterans, and may Warren Hileman rest in eternal peace. 

Mr. President, I speak today to recognize three gifted students from the State of Illinois: Alison Nichols, Brittany Saltiel, and Sara Siegal, all students at Stevenson High School in Lincolnshire, IL.
These three students created a National History Day project on the Mississippi Burning legal case. Alison, Brittany, and Sara's efforts to examine the circumstances of this case have led to not only a reopening of the case but also the overdue indictment of Edgar Ray Killen for the murder of three young civil rights activists: James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael Schwerner.
As a former civil rights attorney and constitutional law lecturer, I know firsthand the importance of ensuring that justice and the principles of our Constitution are always upheld. I am proud to represent Alison, Brittany, and Sara in the Senate as they serve as a reminder of why all of us have committed our lives to public service.
These students have demonstrated their tremendous potential in scholarship and leadership in public affairs. They serve as shining examples for our Nation's young people of how a small group of committed individuals can truly change a community, nation, and the world. Alison, Brittany, and Sara deserve not only our congratulations; they deserve our gratitude for making this country stronger. 

Mr. President, I rise today to discuss the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005. As both a lawyer and a citizen, I am a strong believer in class actions as a way for ordinary people who have been wronged by a corporation to band together and seek justice. Some of our great advances in civil rights and consumer protections have come from these actions.
But there is overwhelming evidence that there are abuses in the class action system that should be addressed. When multimillion dollar settlements are handed down and all the victims get are coupons for a free product, justice is not being served. And when cases are tried in counties only because it's known that those judges will award big payoffs, you get quick settlements without ever finding out who's right and who's wrong.
Every American deserves their day in court. This bill, while not perfect, gives people that day while still providing the reasonable reforms necessary to safeguard against the most blatant abuses of the system. I also hope that the Federal judiciary takes seriously their expanded role in class action litigation, and upholds their responsibility to fairly certify class actions so that they may protect our civil and consumer rights. Senator Specter has pledged to work on these issues and address these serious concerns in the future, and I look forward to joining him so we can improve this law.

Thank you, Mr. President.
I have come to the floor today to briefly address the pending legislation. This issue forces us to face a fundamental question about who we are as a country, how we progress as a society, where our values lie as a people, how do we treat our fellow Americans who have fallen on hard times, and what is our responsibility to cushion those falls when they occur. We do so not only out of compassion for others but also knowing that hard times might at any moment fall on ourselves.
The proponents of this bill claim it is designed to curb the worst abuses of our bankruptcy system. I think that is a worthy goal shared by all those in this Chamber, and we can all agree that bankruptcy was never meant to serve as a "get out of jail free" card for use when you foolishly gamble away all your savings and don't feel like taking responsibility for your actions.
But to accomplish that, this bill would take us from a system where judges weed out the abusers from the honest to a system where all the honest are presumed to be abusers, where declaring chapter 7 bankruptcy is made prohibitively expensive for people who have already suffered financial devastation.
With this bill, it doesn't matter if you run up your debt on a trip to Vegas or a trip to the emergency room; you are still treated the same under the law. You still face the possibility that you will never get a chance to start over.
It would be one thing if most people were abusing the system and falling into bankruptcy because they were irresponsible with their finances. I think we need more responsibility with our finances in our society as well as from our Government. But we know that for the most part bankruptcies are caused as a result of bad luck.
We know from a recent study, which was mentioned by the distinguished Senator from Massachusetts, that nearly half of all bankruptcies occur because of an illness that ends up sticking families with medical bills they can't keep up with.
Let me give you as a particular example the case of Suzanne Gibbons, a constituent of mine. A few years back, Suzanne had a good job as a nurse, and a home on Chicago's northwest side. Then she suffered a stroke that left her hospitalized for 5 days. Even though she had health insurance through her job, it only covered $4,000 of the $53,000 in hospital bills. As a consequence of that illness, she was soon forced to leave her full-time nursing job and take a temporary job that paid less and didn't offer health insurance. Then the collection agencies started coming after her for her hospital bills that she couldn't keep up with. She lost her retirement savings, she lost her house, and eventually she was forced to declare bankruptcy. If this bill passes as written without amendment, Suzanne will be treated by the law the same as any scam artist who cheats the system. The decision about whether she can file for chapter 7 bankruptcy would not account for the fact that she fell into financial despair because of her illness.
With all that debt, she would have to hire a lawyer and pay hundreds of dollars more in increased paperwork. After all that, she still might be told she is ineligible for chapter 7 bankruptcy.
As much as we like to believe that the face of this bankruptcy crisis is credit card addicts who spend their way into debt, the truth is it is the face of people such as Suzanne Gibbons. It is the face of middle-class Americans.
Over the last 30 years, bankruptcies have gone up 400 percent. We have had 2,100 more in Illinois this year. We also know what else has gone up: the cost of childcare, the cost of college, the cost of home ownership, and the cost of health care which is now at record highs. People are working harder and longer for less, and they are falling farther and farther behind.
We are not talking about only the poor or even the working poor here. These are middle-class families with two parents who both work at good-paying jobs that put a roof over their heads. They are saving every extra penny they have so their children can go to college and do better than they did. But with just one illness, one emergency, one divorce, these dreams are wiped away.
This bill does a great job helping the credit card industry recover profits they are losing, but what are we doing to help middle-class families to recover the dreams they are losing?
The bankruptcy crisis this bill should address is not only the one facing credit card companies that are currently enjoying record profits. We have to look after those hard-working families who are dealing with record hardships. As Senator Dodd, Senator Feinstein, and others have pointed out, this bill also fails to deal with the aggressive marketing practices and hidden fees credit card companies have used to raise their profits and our debt. Charging a penalty to consumers who make a late payment on a completely unrelated credit card is but one example of these tactics. We need to end these practices so that we are making life easier not only for the credit card companies but for honest, hard-working, middle-class families.
If we are going to crack down on bankruptcy abuse, which we should, we should also make it clear we intend to hold the wealthy and the powerful accountable as well.
One example: In my own State, we had a mining company by the name of Horizon that recently declared bankruptcy and then refused to pay its employees the health benefits it owed them. A Federal bankruptcy judge upheld the right of Horizon to vacate the obligations it had made to its workers. The mine workers involved had provided a total of 100,000 years of service and dedication and sacrifice to this company. They had spent their entire lives working hard. They had deferred part of their salaries because there was an assurance that health care would be available for them. These are men and women with black lung disease, with bad backs, with bad necks, and the company made a decision to go back on their promise, saying we will not pay the debt we owe these workers. And a Federal bankruptcy judge said that is OK, you are permitted to do that.
These same workers now are going to have a tough time as a consequence of this bill filing for bankruptcy. The irony should not be lost on this Chamber. It is wrong that a bill would make it harder for those unemployed workers to declare bankruptcy while doing nothing to prevent the bankrupt company that puts them in financial hardship in the first place from shirking its responsibilities entirely.

That is an accurate assessment by the distinguished Senator from Massachusetts. I appreciate that amplification.
The central point is, what kind of message does it send when we tell hard-working, middle-class Americans, you have to be more responsible with your finances than the companies you work for? They are allowed to be irresponsible with their finances and we give them a pass when they have bad management decisions, but you do not have a pass when confronting difficulties outside of your control.
We need to reform our Bankruptcy Code so corporations keep their promises and meet their obligations to their workers. I remain hopeful our companies want to do the right thing for workers. Doing so should not be a choice, it should be a mandate.
Senator Rockefeller and I have proposed two amendments to ensure this. I strongly urge my colleagues' support. One will increase the required payments of wages and employee benefit plans to $15,000 per individual from the current level of $4,925. It requires companies that emerge from bankruptcy to immediately pay each retiree who lost health benefits an amount of cash equal to what a retiree would be expected to have to pay for COBRA coverage for 18 months.
The second amendment prevents bankruptcy courts from dismissing companies' Coal Act obligations to pay their workers the benefits they were promised. These companies made a deal to their mine workers. They should be forced to honor that deal. That will be an amendment that hopefully will be added to the pending bill.
This bill gives a rare chance to ask ourselves who we are here to protect, for whom we are here to stand up, for whom we are here to speak. We have to curb bankruptcy abuse and demand a measure of personal responsibility from all people. We all want that. We also want to make sure we are helping middle-class families who are loving their children and doing anything they can to give them the best possible life ahead.
To wrap up, in the 10 minutes I have been speaking, about 30 of those middle class families have had to file for bankruptcy. We live in a rapidly changing world, with an economy that is moving just as fast. We cannot always control this. We cannot promise the changes will always leave everyone better off. But we can do better than 1 bankruptcy every 19 seconds. We can do better than forcing people to choose between the cost of health care and the cost of college. We can do better than big corporations using bankruptcy laws to deny health care and benefits to their employees. And we can give people the basic tools and protections they need to believe that in America your circumstances are no limit to the success you can achieve and the dreams you may fulfill.
While, unfortunately, I cannot support this bill the way it is currently written, I do look forward to working with my colleagues in amending this bill so we can still keep the promise alive.

That is an accurate statement by the distinguished Senator from Massachusetts. He characterizes it correctly.
I add that all the statistics I have seen indicate one of the fastest growing segments engaged in bankruptcy is senior citizens who I don't think are any different than they were back in the day when we think people were more responsible and more thrifty. I think they are still thrifty and responsible. What has happened is they are experiencing extremely tough times partly because they are having difficulty paying for prescription medicines that are not covered under Medicaid.

Mr. President, I rise to recognize an important anniversary in the history of this Nation.
One hundred and thirty-five years ago on this day, Hiram R. Revels was sworn in as a U.S. Senator from Mississippi. On that day, February 25, 1870, Senator Revels became the first African American to ever serve in the U.S. Congress.
But Hiram Revel's story started in a place very far from Washington, DC. He was born to free parents in 1822 and grew up as an apprentice to a barber in North Carolina. But Hiram wanted to learn more and see more, and so he left for Indiana and then Ohio, where he furthered his education. He was soon ordained a minister by the African Methodist Church, and traveled to congregations all over the Midwest and the South until he finally ended up in Baltimore.
At the beginning of the Civil War, he helped recruit African-American troops for the Union, and he ended up serving as a chaplain for a Mississippi regiment of free Blacks. He stayed in Mississippi after the war, and continued serving as a pastor at various local churches. In 1868, and he ran and was elected alderman. Respected by both Whites and African Americans, he was soon elected as a Mississippi State senator. Then, in 1870, just 5 years after the end of the very war fought for his freedom, Hiram Revels was elected the first African-American U.S. Senator in history.
Like so many of our own, Hiram's story is America's story. The story of the seemingly impossible occurring in a land where good people will give everything to make it possible. The story of hope winning out against all odds. The story of one man's improbable achievement paving the way for so many others.
Did Hiram ever know what he was destined for in that barber shop? When he was sweeping that floor in North Carolina and so many of his brothers and sisters were enslaved, did he ever dream that he would end up a U.S. Senator?
We don't know. But we do know that he did dream of bigger things.
He dreamed of an education, and so even though many kids like him didn't do it, he went to college. He dreamed of helping others, and so even though it involved sacrifice, he became a minister. He dreamed of a free America, and so even though it could have cost him his life, he joined the Union. And he dreamed of lifting up his community, and so even though it wasn't done by people of his color, he ran for office.
He dreamed of making this world a better place, and in doing so, he found a place in history. And so we remember this day — his day — as a symbol of what is possible for those of us who are willing to make it so in this magical place we call America.

Mr. President, I rise to recognize and remember the life of Earl Langdon Neal.
Mr. Neal was one of the finest lawyers and civic leaders Chicago has ever known. From mayors to citizens, business leaders to college students, he was a trusted friend and inspiring mentor to many — including myself. Earl earned his law degree from Michigan Law School in 1952. Following graduation, he served his country in the U.S. Army until 1955, when he returned to Chicago to join his father's law firm, Neal & Neal.
On their very first case, Earl and his father were forced to commute 170 miles from Chicago to Lincoln simply because there were no hotels in Lincoln that would accept African Americans. But he went anyway because, as his son has said, it wasn't just a job for Earl — it was a way of life.
It was a way of life that led him to serve the city of Chicago as a special assistant corporation counsel responsible for countless land acquisition projects, including the Dan Ryan Expressway, O'Hare's expansion, and the Chicago city colleges, a way of life that led him to start his own practice and earn a place on the University of Illinois board of trustees, a way of life that made almost every person who came to know him speak of him as a warm, compassionate man who put the well-being of his clients above all else.
Earl's passion for his work wasn't complicated. He simply looked around his community and wanted to make it better. And in so many ways, from the places he made possible, to the people's lives he touched, he did. We honor his life, pray for his family, and will miss him dearly. 

Mr. President, as the Peace Corps celebrates its 44th anniversary this month, I would like to take this opportunity to commend its many wonderful volunteers, past and present, and the remarkable work they do. I am very pleased to report that three universities in Illinois — the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, Northwestern University, and the University of Chicago — are three of the top Peace Corps-volunteer producing colleges and universities in the country. There are currently 295 volunteers from Illinois working in countries around the world, and I am tremendously proud of the service provided by each and every one of them.
The work of the Peace Corps in promoting mutual understanding between our country and the rest of the world has never been more relevant than it is today. The Peace Corps began in 1961 under President John F. Kennedy as a unique experiment in humanitarian service and cultural exchange and has grown to become one of the most widely respected American institutions in the world. Since the founding of the Peace Corps, over 178,000 volunteers have served in 138 countries.
Peace Corps volunteers share their knowledge, skills, and enthusiasm by serving as health educators, youth and agricultural workers, teachers, and business advisors. Of the 7,700 volunteers currently serving, over 3,100 are working on HIV/AIDS education and prevention projects, and I commend them on their critically important work on this global crisis.
I also would like to honor past volunteers who have helped to build this wonderful program into what it is today, who have empowered and given voice to individuals and communities in developing countries around the world. Individually and collectively, Peace Corps volunteers represent the very best of our great country, and I am proud to salute them on their 44th anniversary.

Mr. President, over the last century, the Nation has witnessed tremendous advances in medical science and technology. We now have treatments and cures for diseases and conditions that were at one time surely fatal. Thirty years ago, if children developed cancer, doctors couldn't save their lives. Today, more than three-quarters of children with cancer survive. Heart disease is no longer the leading cause of death because of significant improvements in medical treatment and surgical procedures. Americans with AIDS are living many years longer and spending more time at home and not in hospitals because of new drug cocktails that prevent infections and other deadly complications.
The unfortunate and bitter irony is that while the number of medical breakthroughs continues to increase, so does the number of Americans who will never benefit from them. Right now, 45 million Americans have no health care coverage, and this number continues to rise. Over a 2-year period, over 85 million Americans have not had continuous insurance coverage. In this land of plenty and opportunity, 350,000 uninsured children with earaches and sore throats will never see a doctor. Sixteen million uninsured Americans cannot afford to fill prescriptions. Uninsured women who develop breast cancer are 40 percent more likely to die, as are 50 percent of uninsured men with prostate cancer. The Institute of Medicine has reported that 18,000 adults die every year because they are uninsured.
For many Americans, Medicaid represents their only real hope of obtaining health care. Nationally, 53 million people rely on Medicaid coverage, including 25 million children, 13 million low-income adults, and 15 million disabled and elderly Americans. Nearly 16 percent of people who live in rural areas have Medicaid coverage, including more than 1 in 4 children in these areas. One quarter of African Americans and 20 percent of Hispanics rely on Medicaid, as do 9 percent of women.
In my home State of Illinois, Medicaid provides health coverage for 2 million residents. Over 30 percent of children in Illinois receive health care through KidCare. Nearly 65 percent of nursing home residents rely on Medicaid coverage.
Despite Medicaid's critical role in providing access to care, the Republican budget proposes to cut Medicaid by $15 billion. This cut translates into an estimated $287 million loss for Illinois. Experts report this funding could provide health care coverage for 200,000 children or 135,000 working parents in my State.
Some of my colleagues argue that we have no choice but to make large cuts to Medicaid because of the deficit. But these deficits were created by huge tax breaks for the rich, not by Medicaid, and we should not balance the budget at the expense of health care for low-income children, their parents, pregnant women and seniors. We cannot keep tax cuts for the rich and cut basic health care for the poor. We cannot retreat from our Federal commitment to Medicaid and leave the States holding the bag.
I agree the Medicaid Program is not perfect. The Smith-Bingaman amendment to create a commission to study the program and make recommendations for improvement is a reasonable approach. Sound policy, not politics or deficit concerns, should guide any changes to the Medicaid Program, and I am not convinced that we have examined or discussed the full range of Medicaid-related issues and options before us.
We cannot and should not deny millions of Americans access to basic health care. Medicaid is the Nation's safety net, and we should strengthen it, not destroy it. I am going to vote yes for the Smith-Bingaman amendment to strike proposed cuts in funding for Medicaid, and I urge my colleagues to join me.

Mr. President, I am pleased to join as a cosponsor of the Fuels Security Act of 2005, which sets a renewable fuels standard for the years 2006 to 2012.
To lessen our dependence on foreign oil and strengthen our economy here at home, renewable fuels like ethanol ought to be a larger part of our domestic fuel supply. This bill will contribute to that objective, and I commend Senators Lugar and Harkin for their leadership in crafting this legislation.
Yesterday, during the markup of a similar bill in the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, I expressed strong support for establishing a meaningful renewable fuels standard as an important part of a comprehensive national energy policy. The bill before the Committee set targets at 3.8 billion gallons in 2006 and 6 billion gallons in 2012, improving upon last year's RFS provision in the energy bill conference report that set targets at 3.1 billion gallons and 5 billion gallons, respectively.
I voted for the chairman's mark yesterday because it gets the RFS debate rolling in the new Congress. However, I also noted that it has been widely reported in the trade press that the 30-state Governors Ethanol Coalition has recommended to the President that refiners be required to purchase a minimum volume of ethanol of at least 4 billion gallons in 2006, rising to 8 billion gallons in 2012. This recommendation adds weight to the view expressed by me and others that the committee's targets are too conservative.
Why are these specific targets so important? They are important if we are to maximize the ethanol industry's ability to boost farm income by providing a new market for corn; to promote economic growth in rural communities by increasing production in existing plants and attracting investment in new community-sized ethanol facilities; and to reduce our alarming dependence on imported oil by expanding the volume of ethanol in our transportation fuel mix.
These are important objectives. They matter. And that is why it is important to get the specific targets right.
In committee yesterday, I suggested that since ethanol production is expected to reach 4 billion gallons this year, we ought to adjust the committee bill's RFS targets on the Senate floor to reflect current market reality. I am pleased that Chairman Inhofe seemed open to that debate.
I think the Governors Ethanol Coalition recommendation of at least 4 billion gallons in 2006 and 8 billion gallons in 2012 is a good place to start this debate. I think any RFS legislation enacted by Congress should contain these levels.
That is why I am pleased to cosponsor the Fuels Security Act introduced by Senators Lugar and Harkin today. The ethanol volume targets in this bill — 4 billion gallons in 2006 and 8 billion gallons in 2012 — are in much greater alignment with expected ethanol production in future years than those in the Committee bill.
Earlier this week, I had the opportunity to tour the Aventine ethanol plant in Pekin, IL. My visit reminded me of the work of a Pekin native more than 50 years ago. That person — Senator Everett Dirksen — encouraged federal lawmakers to consider "processing our surplus farm crops into an alcohol . . . to create a market in our own land for our own people."
Today, farmers across Illinois, including farmers near Pekin, are growing corn for fuel, both strengthening our energy security and providing an economic boost to rural communities. By enacting a meaningful RFS, we are displacing more foreign oil with homegrown energy. We are expanding the market for Illinois corn. And we are promoting the use of renewable fuel. Remember, unlike other energy sources, when you run out of ethanol, you can simply grow more.
 By Mr. REID:
S. 651. A bill to amend title 5, United States Code, to make creditable for civil service retirement purposes certain periods of service performed with Air America, Incorporated, Air Asia Company Limited, or the Pacific Division of Southern Air Transport, Incorporated, while those entities were owned or controlled by the Government of the United States and operate or managed by the Central Intelligence Agency; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the Record.
 There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
(a) In General.--Section 8332(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking "and" at the end of paragraph (16); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (17) and inserting "; and"; (3) by adding after paragraph (17) the following: "(18) any period of service performed before 1977, while a citizen of the United States, in the employ of Air America, Incorporated, Air Asia Company Limited (a subsidiary of Air America, Incorporated), or the Pacific Division of Southern Air Transport, Incorporated, at a time when that corporation (or subsidiary) was owned or controlled by the Government of the United States and operated or managed by the Central Intelligence Agency."; and (4) by adding at the end the following: "For purposes of this subchapter, service of the type described in paragraph (18) of this subsection shall be considered to have been service as an employee, and the Office of Personnel Management shall accept the certification of the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency or his designee concerning any such service.". (b) Exemption From Deposit Requirement.--Section 8334(g) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking "or" at the end of paragraph (5); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (6) and inserting "; or"; and (3) by adding after paragraph (6) the following: "(7) any service for which credit is allowed under section 8332(b)(18) of this title.".
(a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to annuities commencing on or after the effective date of this Act. (b) Provisions Relating to Current Annuitants.--Any individual who is entitled to an annuity for the month in which this Act becomes effective may, upon application submitted to the Office of Personnel Management within 2 years after the effective date of this Act, have the amount of such annuity recomputed as if the amendments made by this Act had been in effect throughout all periods of service on the basis of which such annuity is or may be based. Any such recomputation shall be effective as of the commencement date of the annuity, and any additional amounts becoming payable for periods before the first month for which the recomputation is reflected in the individual's regular monthly annuity payments shall be payable to such individual in the form of a lump-sum payment. (c) Provisions Relating to Individuals Eligible for (But Not Currently Receiving) an Annuity.-- (1) In general.--Any individual (not described in subsection (b)) who becomes eligible for an annuity or for an increased annuity as a result of the enactment of this Act may elect to have such individual's rights under subchapter III of chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code, determined as if the amendments made by this Act had been in effect, throughout all periods of service on the basis of which such annuity is or would be based, by submitting an appropriate application to the Office of Personnel Management within 2 years after-- (A) the effective date of this Act; or (B) if later, the date on which such individual separates from service. (2) Commencement date, etc.-- (A) In general.--Any entitlement to an annuity or to an increased annuity resulting from an application under paragraph (1) shall be effective as of the commencement date of such annuity (subject to subparagraph (B), if applicable), and any amounts becoming payable for periods before the first month for which regular monthly annuity payments begin to be made in accordance with the amendments made by this Act shall be payable to such individual in the form of a lump-sum payment. (B) Retroactivity.--Any determination of the amount, or of the commencement date, of any annuity, all the requirements for entitlement to which (including separation, but disregarding any application requirement) would have been satisfied before the effective date of this Act if this Act had then been in effect (but would not then otherwise have been satisfied absent this Act) shall be made as if application for such annuity had been submitted as of the earliest date that would have been allowable, after such individual's separation from service, if such amendments had been in effect throughout the periods of service referred to in the first sentence of paragraph (1). (d) Right To File on Behalf of a Decedent.--The regulations under section 4(a) shall include provisions, consistent with the order of precedence set forth in section 8342(c) of title 5, United States Code, under which a survivor of an individual who performed service described in section 8332(b)(18) of such title (as amended by section 1) shall be allowed to submit an application on behalf of and to receive any lump-sum payment that would otherwise have been payable to the decedent under subsection (b) or (c). Such an application shall not be valid unless it is filed within 2 years after the effective date of this Act or 1 year after the date of the decedent's death, whichever is later.
(a) Lump-Sum Payments.--Any lump-sum payments under section 2 shall be payable out of the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund. (b) Unfunded Liability.--Any increase in the unfunded liability of the Civil Service Retirement System attributable to the enactment of this Act shall be financed in accordance with section 8348(f) of title 5, United States Code.
(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, in consultation with the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, shall prescribe any regulations necessary to carry out this Act. Such regulations shall include provisions under which rules similar to those established pursuant to section 201 of the Federal Employees' Retirement System Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-335; 100 Stat. 514) shall be applied with respect to any service described in section 8332(b)(18) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by section 1) that was subject to title II of the Social Security Act. (b) Other Regulations.--The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, shall prescribe any regulations which may become necessary, with respect to any retirement system administered by the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, as a result of the enactment of this Act. (c) Special Rule.--For purposes of any application for any benefit which is computed or recomputed taking into account any service described in section 8332(b)(18) of title 5, United States Code (as amended by section 1), section 8345(i)(2) of such title shall be applied by deeming the reference to the date of the "other event which gives rise to title to the benefit" to refer to the effective date of this Act, if later than the date of the event that would otherwise apply.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the terms "unfunded liability", "survivor", and "survivor annuitant" have the meanings given under section 8331 of title 5, United States Code; and (2) the term "annuity", as used in subsections (b) and (c) of section 2, includes a survivor annuity.
 By Mr. SPECTER (for himself and Mr. Santorum):
S. 652. A bill to provide financial assistance for the rehabilitation of the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and the development of an exhibit to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the birth of Benjamin Franklin; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
Mr. President, I have sought recognition today to introduce a bill to authorize Federal funding for the rehabilitation of the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial. This memorial, an attraction for some 1 million visitors annually, is truly a national treasure, yet it has come under significant deterioration. The Franklin statue has not been thoroughly cleaned since 1998; there are structural impacts to the statue from changes in temperature and humidity; the lighting and sound systems are obsolete; and the marble walls and stained glass dome are discolored from days when smoking was permitted. The bill that Senator Santorum and I are introducing today will help ensure that Federal funding is made available to preserve and protect our Nation's memorial to Benjamin Franklin, America's distinguished scientist, statesman, inventor, and diplomat.
In the 108th Congress, Senator Santorum and I introduced similar legislation to authorize this much needed funding and we were pleased that Senator Domenici, Senator Thomas, and their colleagues on the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources favorably reported an amended version of our legislation to the Senate on September 28, 2004. Subsequently, this legislature passed the Senate on October 10, 2004; however, the limited time available prior to adjournment of the 108th Congress precluded passage of this measure by the House of Representatives.
Unlike other national memorials, the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial does not receive an annual allocation of Federal funds to provide for preventative maintenance or other important activities.
 By Mr. LEAHY (for himself, Mr. Durbin, Mr. Kennedy, and Mr. Dodd):
S. 654. A bill to prohibit the expulsion, return, or extradition of persons by the United States to countries engaging in torture, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
Mr. President, our Nation has a proud history as the leading advocate of human rights around the world. Throughout this history, we have committed ourselves to numerous international human rights treaties, including the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The bill that I introduce today will reaffirm our obligations under this Convention and reassure the world that we are a nation committed to the rule of law. I want to thank my cosponsors, Senators Durbin, Kennedy, and Dodd, for working with me on this legislation, and for their leadership on these issues.
It has been nearly a year since the first horrific images from Abu Ghraib prison appeared in the media, shocking the world and shattering the image of the United States. As the Administration circled the wagons and claimed the abuses were committed by a "few bad apples," new details about the widespread abuse of detainees continued to emerge. I have spoken many times about the need for a comprehensive, independent investigation into the abuse of detainees. I have no doubt that such an investigation would be painful, but it is also a necessary step to moving forward.
Prisoner abuse by U.S. personnel is deeply troubling, but it is only one aspect of a broader and serious problem. While we must ensure that prisoners are treated humanely by our own personnel, we must also prohibit the use of so-called "extraordinary renditions" to send people to other countries where they will be subject to torture. Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture states that "no State Party shall expel, return or extradite a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture." The bill I introduce today, the "Convention Against Torture Implementation Act," will ensure that we honor this commitment.
We have addressed this issue before. Congress implemented Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture in the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998, but this Administration has exploited loopholes in that law to transfer detainees to countries where they are subjected to torture. Attorney General Gonzales recently said that U.S. policy is not to send detainees "to countries where we believe or we know that they're going to be tortured," but he acknowledged that we "can't fully control" what other nations do, and added that he does not know whether countries have always complied with their promises. In fact, they have not.
My proposed legislation does not broaden the obligations that we agreed to by ratifying the Convention Against Torture; it simply closes the loopholes in the 1998 law and ensures that we honor our commitment not to outsource torture to other countries.
The case of Maher Arar provides a chilling example of extraordinary rendition, and illustrates why this bill is necessary. Mr. Arar, a Canadian and Syrian citizen, was stopped by immigration officers at John F. Kennedy International Airport in September 2002 as he attempted to change planes on his way home to Canada from Tunisia. He claims that he was interrogated by an FBI agent and a New York City police officer, and that he was denied access to a lawyer. He further claims that he repeatedly told U.S. officials that he feared he would be tortured if deported to Syria. After being detained for nearly two weeks in a Federal detention center in New York, Mr. Arar was transferred by U.S. authorities to Syria and held at the Bush administration's request. Mr. Arar claims that he was physically tortured during the first two weeks of his detention in Syria, and that he was subjected to severe psychological abuse over the following 10 months, including being held in a grave-like cell and being forced to undergo interrogation while hearing the screams of other prisoners.
According to Administration officials, the CIA received diplomatic assurances from Syria that it would not torture Mr. Arar. But those assurances amounted to little more than a wink and a nod. Unnamed intelligence officials were later quoted in the press, saying that Arar confessed under torture in Syria that he had gone to Afghanistan for terrorist training. Syria has a well-documented history of state-sponsored torture. In fact, President Bush stated on November 7, 2003, that Syria has left "a legacy of torture, oppression, misery, and ruin" to its people.
Rather than rely on assurances that a country will not torture an individual, we must make our own unbiased determination. We already have the necessary information to do so. Each year, as required by law, the State Department publishes country reports on human rights practices. The most recent report on Syria states that its torture methods include "administering electrical shocks; pulling out fingernails; forcing objects into the rectum; beating, sometimes while the victim was suspended from the ceiling; hyperextending the spine; bending the detainees into the frame of a wheel and whipping exposed body parts; and using a backward-bending chair to asphyxiate the victim or fracture the victim's spine."
Some will argue that the post-9/11 world is different; that we must use any and all means available to extract information from suspected terrorists. Their argument might be more credible if every person who turned up on a terrorist watch list were, in fact, a terrorist. I cannot say whether Mr. Arar had ties to terrorist groups or not, but we do know that he was never charged with a crime. After enduring months of torture at the hands of the Syrians, he was released and sent back to Canada.
Nor was Mr. Arar's experience an isolated incident. A recent article in The New Yorker titled "Outsourcing Torture" provides disturbing details about how the administration embraced the use of rendition after the 9/11 attacks. Several press reports detail the CIA's use of its own Gulfstream V and Boeing 737 jets to secretly transfer detainees to countries around the world, where it is likely that they will be tortured.
The Convention Against Torture Implementation Act addresses the extraordinary rendition problem in a straightforward manner. It requires the State Department to produce annually a list of countries where torture is known to occur. The list would be based on information contained in the State Department's country reports on human rights practices. The bill prohibits the transfer of individuals to any country on this list or to any other country if there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be tortured. It also provides reasonable exceptions to this prohibition to allow for legal extraditions and removals.
Most importantly, the bill closes the diplomatic assurances loophole. We would no longer accept assurances from governments that we know engage in torture. Our past reliance on diplomatic assurances is blatantly hypocritical. How can our State Department denounce countries for engaging in torture while the CIA secretly transfers detainees to the very same countries for interrogation? The President says he does not condone torture, but transferring detainees to other countries where they will be tortured does not absolve our government of responsibility. By outsourcing torture to these countries, we diminish our own values as a nation and lose our credibility as an advocate of human rights around the world.
Last June, in the aftermath of the Abu Ghraib scandal, the President was asked if he had authorized abusive interrogation techniques. He replied, "The authorization I issued was that anything we did would conform to U.S. law and would be consistent with international treaty obligations." The legislation I introduce today will help us fulfill the President's promise.
The Senate gave its advice and consent to the ratification of the Convention Against Torture more than a decade ago. It is time to honor our commitment and show the world that we will hold ourselves to the same standards that we demand of others.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill and a section-by-section analysis be printed in the Record.
 There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
This Act may be cited as the "Convention Against Torture Implementation Act of 2005".
(a) Prohibition.--No person in the custody or control of a department, agency, or official of the United States Government, or of any contractor of any such department or agency, shall be expelled, returned, or extradited to another country, whether directly or indirectly, if-- (1) the country is included on the most recent list submitted to Congress by the Secretary of State under section 3; or (2) there are otherwise substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture. (b) Exceptions.-- (1) Waivers.-- (A) Authority.--The Secretary of State may waive the prohibition in subsection (a)(1) with respect to a country if the Secretary certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that-- (i) the acts of torture that were the basis for including that country on the list have ended; and (ii) there is in place a mechanism that assures the Secretary in a verifiable manner that a person expelled, returned, or extradited to that country will not be tortured in that country, including, at a minimum, immediate, unfettered, and continuing access, from the point of return, to such person by an independent humanitarian organization. (B) Reports on waivers.-- (i) Reports required.--For each person expelled, returned, or extradited under a waiver provided under subparagraph (A), the head of the appropriate government agency making such transfer shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that includes the name and nationality of the person transferred, the date of transfer, the reason for such transfer, and the name of the receiving country. (ii) Form.--Each report under this subparagraph shall be submitted, to the extent practicable, in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex as necessary to protect the national security of the United States. (2) Extradition or removal.--The prohibition in subsection (a)(1) may not be construed to apply to the legal extradition of a person under a bilateral or multilateral extradition treaty or to the legal removal of a person under the immigration laws of the United States if, before such extradition or removal, the person has recourse to a United States court of competent jurisdiction to challenge such extradition or removal on the basis that there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture in the receiving country. (c) Assurances Insufficient.--Written or verbal assurances made to the United States by the government of a country that persons in its custody or control will not be tortured are not sufficient for believing that a person is not in danger of being subjected to torture for purposes of subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2), or for meeting the requirement of subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii).
Not later than 30 days after the effective date of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report listing each country where torture is known to be used. The list shall be compiled on the basis of the information contained in the most recent annual report of the Secretary of State submitted to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate under section 116(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151n(d)).
(a) Interim Regulations.--Not later than 60 days after the effective date of this Act, the heads of the appropriate government agencies shall prescribe interim regulations for the purpose of carrying out this Act and implementing the obligations of the United States under Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture, subject to any reservations, understandings, declarations, and provisos contained in the Senate resolution advising and consenting to the ratification of the Convention Against Torture, and consistent with the provisions of this Act. (b) Final Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after interim regulations are prescribed under subsection (a), and following a period of notice and opportunity for public comment, the heads of the appropriate government agencies shall prescribe final regulations for the purposes described in subsection (a).
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to eliminate, limit, or constrain in any way the obligations of the United States or the rights of any individual under the Convention Against Torture or any other applicable law.
Section 2242 of the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-277; 8 U.S.C. 1231 note) is repealed. Regulations promulgated under such section that are in effect on the date this Act becomes effective shall remain in effect until the heads of the appropriate government agencies issue interim regulations under section 4(a).
(a) Defined Terms.--In this Act: (1) Appropriate government agencies.--The term "appropriate government agencies" means-- (A) the intelligence community (as defined in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 401a(4))); and (B) elements of the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, the United States Secret Service, the United States Marshals Service, and any other Federal law enforcement, national security, intelligence, or homeland security agency that takes or assumes custody or control of persons or transports persons in its custody or control outside the United States, other than those elements listed or designated as elements of the intelligence community under section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 401a(4))). (2) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term "appropriate congressional committees" means-- (A) the Committees on Armed Services, Homeland Security and Government Affairs, Judiciary, Foreign Relations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate; and (B) the Committees on Armed Services, Homeland Security, Judiciary, International Relations, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives. (3) Convention against torture.--The term "Convention Against Torture" means the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, done at New York on December 10, 1984, entered into force on June 26, 1987, signed by the United States on April 18, 1988, and ratified by the United States on October 21, 1994 (T. Doc. 100-20). (4) Expelled person.--A person who is expelled is a person who is involuntarily transferred from the territory of any country, or a port of entry thereto, to the territory of another country, or a port of entry thereto. (5) Extradited person.--A person who is extradited is an accused person who, in accordance with chapter 209 of title 18, United States Code, is surrendered or delivered to another country with jurisdiction to try and punish the person. (6) Returned person.--A person who is returned is a person who is transferred from the territory of any country, or a port of entry thereto, to the territory of another country of which the person is a national or where the person has previously resided, or a port of entry thereto. (b) Same Terms as in the Convention Against Torture.-- Except as otherwise provided, the terms used in this Act have the meanings given those terms in the Convention Against Torture, subject to any reservations, understandings, declarations, and provisos contained in the Senate resolution advising and consenting to the ratification of the Convention Against Torture.
This Act shall take effect on the date that is 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
This Act shall be classified to the United States Code as a new chapter of title 50, United States Code.
This Act shall be classified to the United States Code as a new chapter of title 50, United States Code.Convention Against Torture Implementation Act of 2005 Section-by- Section Analysis
This Act shall be classified to the United States Code as a new chapter of title 50, United States Code.Convention Against Torture Implementation Act of 2005 Section-by- Section AnalysisSec. 1. Short Title. The Convention Against Torture Implementation Act of 2005. Sec. 2. Prohibition on Certain Transfers of Persons. This section implements Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture, which prohibits expelling, returning, or extraditing persons to countries where they are in danger of being subjected to torture. Subsection (a) prohibits the transfer of a person in the custody or control of the United States government to a country included on a list generated by the State Department, as required by Section 3 of this Act, or to countries where there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture. Subsection (b) allows exceptions to the prohibition if the Secretary of State waives the prohibition or if the transfer is done under an extradition treaty or as a legal removal under United States immigration laws. Agencies that transfer a detainee under the waiver exception must submit a report of the transfer to appropriate congressional committees. Subsection (c) states that assurances made to the United States by another government that persons in its custody will not be tortured are not sufficient for the United States to conclude that a person will not be subjected to torture. Sec. 3. Reports on Countries Using Torture. This section requires the Secretary of State, on an annual basis, to compile a list of countries where torture is known to be used. The United States is prohibited from transferring persons to the countries on this list, except in accordance with the exceptions contained in section 2. The list shall be compiled based on information contained in the most recent State Department country reports on human rights practices, which the Department submits annually in accordance with section 116(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151n(d)). Sec. 4. Regulations. This section requires appropriate government agencies (as defined in section 7) to prescribe regulations in accordance with this Act. Interim regulations must be prescribed within 60 days of the effective date of the Act. Final regulations must be prescribed, through notice and comment rulemaking, not more than 180 days thereafter. Sec. 5. Savings Clause. This section ensures that the Act does not eliminate, limit, or constrain the obligations of the United States or the rights of any individual under the Convention Against Torture or any other applicable law. Sec. 6. Repeal of Superseded Authority. This section repeals section 2242 of the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-277; 8 U.S.C. 1231 note). This law also implemented Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture, but lacked specific guidance for agencies and allowed the United States to rely on diplomatic assurances that a government would not torture a person transferred to its custody. This section also requires agency regulations promulgated under section 2242 to remain in effect until the appropriate government agencies issue new regulations in accordance with section 4 of this Act. Sec. 7. Definitions. This section defines "Appropriate Government Agencies," "Appropriate Congressional Committees," "Expelled Person," "Extradited Person," "Returned Person," and "Convention Against Torture." It also states that terms used in the Act, unless otherwise provided, have the meanings given to those terms in the Convention Against Torture. Sec. 8. Effective Date. Makes the Act effective 30 days after its enactment. Sec. 9. Classification in United States Code. This section requires the Act to be classified as a new chapter of title 50 in the United States Code. The superseded authority was classified as a note in title 8 in the United States Code. Given the scope and applicability of the Act, it is more accurate to classify it in the War and National Defense title than in the Aliens and Nationality title.
Mr. President, the entire world continues to wait for signs that the administration takes seriously its moral and legal responsibilities to eliminate torture and abuse. It is long past time for the administration to give the American people and the world an ironclad assurance that these shameful tactics are no longer being used in any prison or detention facility under American control and that we are not outsourcing our torture to regimes well known for using them.
I strongly support the legislation that Senator Leahy has introduced to deal with this urgent problem and to see that our Nation is not farming out abusive interrogations to other countries. The bill makes crystal clear that we can't torture by proxy.
Abhorrence to torture is a fundamental value. Our attitude toward torture speaks volumes about our national conscience, our dedication to the rule of law, and our essential ideals. 9/11 is no excuse for abandoning our ideals.
The line separating right from wrong must clearly exclude the reprehensible practice called extraordinary rendition, the ridiculous code word for torture by proxy. Article 3 of the Treaty Against Torture, which the United States has ratified, provides: "No State Party shall expel, return, or extradite a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing he would be in danger of being subjected to torture." The secretive U.S. practice of rendition is a violation of international law because it involves detaining prisoners without a shred of due process and delivering them for interrogation into the hands of countries known to commit torture. As one commentator noted: "In terms of bad behavior, it stands side by side with contract killings."
Ask Maher Arar. In the fall of 2002, Arar, a Canadian citizen, was returning to Montreal from a family visit in Tunisia and he made a stopover at Kennedy Airport in New York City. Acting in part on flawed intelligence from Canadian officials, U.S. Immigration officials seized Mr. Arar at the airport. He was not charged with a crime, or given a chance to talk with a lawyer. Instead, he was held in Brooklyn and interrogated for days by U.S. law enforcement authorities.
When the interrogation failed to produce incriminating information, Mr. Arar was flown to Jordan and handed over to Jordanian authorities. He was chained, blindfolded, and beaten in a van that transported him to the Syrian border. In Syria, he was placed in a small, dark cell — three feet by six feet, like a grave — and was held there for almost a year. He was slapped, beaten, and whipped on his palms, wrists, and back with an electric cable. He begged them to stop. He heard other prisoners screaming as they were tortured. He signed any confessions he was told to sign.
Mr. Arar was released in October 2003. Syrian officials told reporters that their investigators found no link between Mr. Arar and al-Qaida. His confession turned out to be worthless and his suffering was pointless. Mr. Arar is now home in Canada.
How can any of us stand idly by knowing that this country condoned and facilitated such brutality?
Tragically, Mr. Arar is not the only victim. On March 6, 60 Minutes aired a report on rendition. On the program, Michael Scheuer, a recently retired CIA official who created its rendition program, admitted that he would "have to assume" that suspects the U.S. sends to Egypt are tortured. "It's very convenient," he said. "It's finding someone else to do your dirty work."
The Defense Department has attempted to justify this tactic. On June 25, 2003, Defense Department General Counsel William Haynes wrote to Senator Leahy, stating that whenever the U.S. transfers an individual to another country, "United States policy is to obtain specific assurances from the receiving country that it will not torture the individual being transferred to that country. We can assure you that the United States would take steps to investigate credible allegations of torture and take appropriate action if there were reason to believe that those assurances were not being honored."
Mr. Haynes' "assurances," are difficult to accept. The State Department's annual human rights report, released last month, criticized numerous countries for a range of interrogation practices it labeled as torture. The State Department identified Syria, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia, among others, as countries practicing torture. Press reports make clear that since 9/11, the U.S. has flown 100-150 suspects to countries such as these. The State Department condemns Syria for torturing its prisoners, but Mr. Haynes blindly relies on Syria's promise that the prisoners we send there will be treated humanely.
Recent press reports also suggest that the assurances of humane treatment sought by the CIA are worth very little. According to today's Washington Post, "one government official who visited several foreign prisons where suspects were rendered by the CIA said . . . `It's widely understood that the interrogation practices that would be illegal in the U.S. are being used.' " The official also said, "they say they are not abusing them . . . but we all know they do."
According to the Post, an Arab diplomat, whose country is actively engaged in counterterrorism alongside the CIA said it was unrealistic to believe the CIA really wants to follow up on assurances. He said: "It would be stupid to keep track of them because then you would know what's going on." He said, "it's like don't ask don't tell."
So, it seems that we are not fooling anybody but the American public.
We are a Nation of laws, not hypocrites. Our country is strong and our constitutional system has endured because it permits us to do great things and still ensure that we treat people fairly and humanely. We are not supposed to "disappear" people here.
Yet, that is exactly what rendition and the related tactic of "ghost detainees" amounts to, making people vanish into a shadowy world of secret abuse. In his report on the abuses at Abu Ghraib prison, MG. Antonio Taguba wrote that prisoners had not been registered as required by Army regulations and they were being moved around to avoid detection by the Red Cross. General Taguba called the practice "deceptive, contrary to Army doctrine, and in violation of international law." Last September, Army investigators told the Senate Armed Services Committee that as many as 100 detainees at Abu Ghraib had been hidden from the Red Cross at the CIA's direction.
Last month, the Associated Press reported that one of the "ghost detainees" held at Abu Ghraib, Manadel al-Jamadi, died in November 2003 under CIA interrogation. He had been suspended by his wrists, with his hands cuffed behind his back. According to an Army guard who was asked by the interrogator to adjust al-Jamadi's position, blood gushed from his mouth "as if a faucet had been turned on" after he was released from his shackles.
Behavior like that forces us all to ask, "what has America become?"
The issue shows no signs of abating. Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states that transfers of detainees from occupied territory to any other country "are prohibited, regardless of their motive." Violations of the Article constitute "grave breaches" of the Treaty and qualify as "war crimes" under Federal law. Nevertheless, a Justice Department memorandum in March, 2004 re-interpreted the Treaty to allow the CIA to remove prisoners from Iraq for the purpose of "facilitating interrogation." According to press reports, the CIA used this "Goldsmith Memorandum" as justification to transport "as many as a dozen detainees" out of Iraq. The legal analysis in the memorandum is an embarrassment. Yet it appears to have provided the legal justification for the CIA to commit war crimes.
The New York Times recently reported that the U.S. plans to transfer as many as half the 550 detainees held at Guantanamo Bay to prisons in other countries. This week, a Federal judge blocked the government from transferring 13 citizens of Yemen until a hearing can be held on the propriety of the move. Lawyers for the detainees expressed concern that the prisoners would be delivered into the hands of torture.
Even worse, last week Attorney General Gonzales defended the practice of rendition, despite admitting that he "can't fully control" what other nations do and that he doesn't know whether countries have always complied with their promises.
Congress can't allow these shameful tactics to continue. Senator Leahy's bill is designed to prevent them. It states that no person in the custody or control of the United States can be sent to another country on the State Department list of countries that commit torture. Nor, may any person be sent to a country, even if it is not on the State Department list, where there are grounds to believe the person would be in danger of being tortured. The bill states that mere diplomatic assurances that detainees will be treated humanely are not sufficient to permit a detainee's transfer. Instead, in certain circumstances, the act permits delivery of the detainee where there is an actual mechanism to verify that the person will not be tortured, such as by allowing unfettered access to the detainee by humanitarian organizations.
The Bush administration's has clearly condoned the use of torture and abuse by our own government, as well as handing prisoners over to other countries for the same purpose. Officials have approved and used interrogation techniques that include feigning suffocation, feigning drowning, "stress positions," sleep deprivation, and the use of unmuzzled dogs. According to one report, "The methods employed by the CIA are so severe that senior officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation have directed its agents to stay out of many of the interviews of the high-level detainees . . . "because the FBI fears that the techniques could subject their agents to criminal lawsuits.
The anti-rendition bill offered today is a way to start addressing the problem. It deserves to pass as soon as possible. Torture and other abuses of prisoners in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Guantanamo have done immense damage to America's standing in the world and has clearly made the war on terrorism harder to win. We need to repair that damage and re-claim our national commitment to fairness and decency.
 By Mr. ENSIGN (for himself and Ms. Landrieu):
S. 657. A bill to amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to make a technical correction in the definition of outpatient speech-language pathology services; to the Committee on Finance.
Mr. President, today I introduced a bill that would expand access to speech-language pathology care.
Speech-language pathology, or speech therapy, includes services for patients with speech, hearing and language disorders, which result in communication disabilities. Speech therapy also includes the diagnosis and treatment of swallowing disorders, regardless of the presence of communications disability. Communications disabilities most frequently affect patients who suffer from a stroke, tumor, head injury, or have been diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) , or other neuromuscular diseases.
As a result of a legislative anomaly, patients cannot receive Medicare coverage for speech-language pathology care in a private practice setting. Under the Medicare program, the same patient is able to receive such care in a hospital, skilled nursing facility, or rehabilitation facility. This bill would not create a new benefit. Rather, it would provide a technical correction to a section of Medicare statute that originated more than 30 years ago. Under current law, physical therapy and occupational therapy care can be received by patients in the private practice setting.
In 1972, speech-language pathology services were added to the Medicare statute under the physical therapy definition section. 14 years later, occupational therapy was defined under a separate section. Unlike speech-language pathology services, occupational therapy services were not incorporated within the physical therapy definition. As a result, a patient can receive both physical and occupational therapy care in an independent practice setting. The legislation I am introducing today would enable patients to likewise receive speech-language therapy services in private practice settings.
Without this legislative fix, beneficiaries may confront situations in which they either do not have access to a Medicare-covered setting or do not meet the requirements to receive care from other settings. This can be especially problematic in rural communities with fewer hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, and rehabilitation facilities.
For example, consider an elderly patient who is discharged from a hospital, but requires follow-up physical therapy and speech-language pathology care. The patient would be able to obtain necessary physical therapy care in an independent practice setting, but would not be able to receive necessary speech-language pathology care in the same setting. The patient would have to see the necessary speech-language pathology care in another Medicare setting, possibly having to travel farther distances to receive such care or not receive it all.
Essentially, the legislation I am introducing today would ensure that patients have access to speech-language pathology services, particularly in rural areas. I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting this commonsense legislation.
This legislation compliments the measure I introduced last month, called the Medicare Access to Rehabilitation Services Act (S. 438). Both bills ensure access to needed therapy care within the Medicare program. I am committed to working toward their enactment and believe that they will help Medicare beneficiaries obtain the quality health care that they deserve. ______
 By Mr. BROWNBACK (for himself, Ms. Landrieu, Mr. Allard, Mr. Bunning, Mr. Burr, Mr. Chambliss, Mr. Cornyn, Mr. Craig, Mr. Crapo, Mr. Demint, Mr. DeWine, Mrs. Dole, Mr. Domenici, Mr. Ensign, Mr. Graham, Mr. Grassley, Mr. Hagel, Mr. Inhofe, Mr. Kyl, Mr. Martinez, Ms. Murkowski, Mr. Santorum, Mr. Sessions, Mr. Shelby, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Thune, Mr. Vitter, Mr. Voinovich, and Mr. Talent):
S. 658. A bill to amend the Public Health Service Act to prohibit human cloning; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
Mr. President, I rise to speak on the Brownback-Landrieu Human Cloning Prohibition Act, which we introduce today.
The Brownback-Landrieu Human Cloning Prohibition Act remains the only effective ban on human cloning.
This legislation has passed the U.S. House of Representatives twice by large margins. This bill would also bring the U.S. into conformity with the recent vote at the United Nations, where the General Assembly called on all member states "to prohibit all forms of human cloning" by a strong 84 to 34 margin.
President Bush has also spoken eloquently on the Brownback-Landrieu Human Cloning Prohibition Act, when he "wholeheartedly" endorsed the legislation.
The President said: "Human cloning is deeply troubling to me, and to most Americans. Life is a creation, not a commodity.
"Our children are gifts to be loved and protected, not products to be designed and manufactured. Allowing cloning would be taking a significant step toward a society in which human beings are grown for spare body parts, and children are engineered to custom specifications; and that's not acceptable. . . .
"I strongly support a comprehensive law against all human cloning. And I endorse the bill wholeheartedly endorse the bill — sponsored by Senator Brownback and Senator Mary Landrieu."
The President could hardly have been clearer.
We should take a stand against those that would turn young human beings into commodities and spare parts. We should not use human life for research purposes.
The legislation introduced by Sen. Landrieu and myself, along with over one quarter of the Senate, answers that human life should not be used for research purposes.
Let there be no doubt. Science affirms that the young human, at his or her earliest moments of life, is a human. It is wrong to treat another person as a piece of property that can be bought and sold, created and destroyed, all at the will of those in power.
The issue of human cloning — and specifically how we treat the young human — will determine the kind of future we will give to our children and grandchildren.
The essential question is whether or not we will allow human beings to be produced, to preordained specifications, for their eventual implantation or destruction, depending upon the intentions of the technicians who created them.
Will we create life simply to destroy it?
I firmly believe that human life should be cherished and that human dignity should be protected.
I also firmly believe that ethically-sound research should proceed in the search for cures. The legislation that we introduce today takes a very thoughtful approach and is careful not to ban or interfere with gene therapy, IVF practices, or DNA, cell or tissue cloning — other than with cloned embryos.
Now, some of our colleagues will tell you that they oppose `reproductive cloning,' but then turn around and call for `therapeutic cloning' or `SCNT.' Whether intentional or not, to argue that there are different types of human cloning creates a distinction that simply does not exist.
All human cloning is `reproductive.' The question is simply: What do you do with the young, cloned human? Do you implant it and bring it to birth — like the sheep Dolly — or do you research on and kill the young human being, as advocates of so-called `therapeutic' cloning would have us do?
Any other so-called human cloning bans, outside of the Brownback-Landrieu Human Cloning Prohibition Act, are not enforceable. Once the young human has been cloned, you cannot distinguish it from any other human embryo produced by IVF or embodied sexual intercourse.
If so-called `therapeutic' human cloning proceeds — and there are no laws in the U.S. against it — one of these human clones will be implanted, and there is nothing we can do to stop human cloning once we reach this point.
Even if we detected a clonal human pregnancy, nothing could be done about it. Any remedies or punishments would be highly unpopular and unenforceable.
 By Mr. HATCH (for himself, Mr. Baucus, Mr. Grassley, and Mrs. Lincoln):
S. 661. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for the modernization of the United States Tax Court, and for other purposes, to the Committee on Finance.
Mr. President, I rise today to introduce the Tax Court Modernization Act. I am joined in this legislation by the Chairman and Ranking Democrat of the Finance Committee, Senator Grassley and Senator Baucus, and my colleague Senator Lincoln.
The United States Tax Court plays an important role in our tax system. However, it has been years since Congress has taken a good hard look at the Tax Court. This bipartisan piece of legislation will improve this Court in a number of ways, and I would like to take a moment to summarize some of its provisions.
First, the TCMA would make minor changes in the Tax Court's jurisdiction. These are small changes that will have a big impact on the Court's efficiency. For example, the bill would allow the Tax Court to hire employees on its own, just as other courts do. Currently, the Tax Court is forced to hire through the Executive Branch's Office of Personnel Management, entangling the executive power with the judicial power. Restoring the constitutional separation of powers in the hiring process will increase the independence of the Tax Court.
Second, the TCMA would improve the way that Tax Court judges receive retirement benefits and other non-salary benefits. I believe that Tax Court judges should be treated the same way that bankruptcy, Court of Federal Claims, and Article III judges are treated when it comes to fringe benefits.
Tax Court judges are often not provided with the same benefits as similarly appointed Article I and Article III judges. For example, Congress allows Article III, bankruptcy, and Court of Federal Claims judges to participate in the Thrift Savings Plan in addition to the Civil Service Retirement System, while Tax Court judges are ineligible to participate in this program. These disparities in the treatment of our Tax Court judges affect the Court's ability to attract and retain seasoned judges, as well as talented employees.
This legislation is non-controversial and is the result of many years of work. The Finance Committee passed the bill three separate times during the 108th Congress, but it unfortunately was not included in a vehicle that made it to enactment. Hopefully, we will be able to get these provisions to the President's desk this year.
I have spent many years observing the Federal judiciary. I have spent many years trying to improve the Judicial Branch of our government and to make it the very finest court system the world has ever known. I look forward to working with my colleagues on the Senate Finance Committee on this important piece of legislation. I urge my colleagues, both on the Finance Committee and in the Senate as a whole, to support this legislation.
I ask unanimous consent to print in the Record a summary of the provisions of the U.S. Tax Court Modernization Act. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Jurisdiction of Tax Court over collection due process cases. Currently, if a taxpayer's underlying tax liability does not relate to income taxes or a type of tax over which the Tax Court normally has deficiency jurisdiction, there is no opportunity for Tax Court review and the taxpayer must file in a District Court to obtain review. This provision consolidates judicial review of collection due process activity in the Tax Court. Authority for special trial judges to hear and decide certain employment status cases. This provision clarifies that the Tax Court may authorize its special trial judges to enter decisions in employment status cases that are subject to small case proceedings under section 7436(c). Confirmation of authority of Tax Court to apply doctrine of equitable recoupment. The common-law principle of equitable recoupment permits a party to assert an otherwise time-barred claim to reduce or defeat an opponent's claim if both claims arise from the same transaction. This provision confirms statutorily that the Tax Court may apply equitable recoupment principles to the same extent as District Courts and the Court of Federal Claims. Tax Court filing fee in all cases commenced by filing petition. This provision clarifies, in keeping with current Tax Court procedure, that the Tax Court is authorized to impose a $60 filing fee for all cases commenced by petition. The proposal would eliminate the need to amend section 7451 each time the Tax Court is granted new jurisdiction. Amendments to appoint employees. Currently, the Tax Court has to go to the executive branch, the Office of Personnel Management, to change a position. It is inappropriate to require the Tax Court to seek permission from the executive since that branch is a party (Commissioner of Internal Revenue) before the Tax Court. This change would allow the Tax Court to be independent in fact and perception from the Executive Branch while ensuring that basic employee rights, protections, and remedies are retained or required in an appropriate way (e.g., whistleblower protection, civil rights, merit system principles, etc.). Expanded use of Tax Court practice fee for pro se taxpayers. The Tax Court is authorized to charge practitioners a fee of up to $30 per year and to use these fees to pursue disciplinary matters. The provision expands use of these fees to provide services to pro se taxpayers. Fees could be used for education programs for pro se taxpayers. Annuities for survivors of Tax Court judges who are assassinated. The reality is that many people do not like to pay taxes. There is as much risk of a Tax Court judge being assassinated as any other Federal judge. The proposal would conform the treatment of Tax Court judges to District Court judges. Cost-of-living adjustments for Tax Court judicial survivor annuities. All Federal employees have this provision except the Tax Court. Survivors of Tax Court judges are subject to an obsolete method of indexing. Life insurance coverage for Tax Court judges. This simply codifies current Office of Personnel Management interpretation, as was previously done for District Court judges. Cost of life insurance coverage for Tax Court judges age 65 or over. Congress established the Tax Court in 1969 and required that Tax Court judges receive the same compensation as District Court judges. The District Court judges were given this benefit to ensure that there was no diminution of their compensation (as required by the Constitution). This provision is in keeping with the original intent of Congress. Modification of timing of lump-sum payment of judge's accrued annual leave. District Court judges are allowed to receive a lump-sum payment due to the life-time tenure of Article III judges. Tax Court judges, while they have a 15 year term, effectively have a life-time term because they are always subject to recall. Participation of Tax Court judges in the Thrift Savings Plan. The proposal would allow Tax Court judges to participate in Thrift Savings Plan. Currently, only 19 federal government employees are left out of the Thrift Savings Plan (i.e., Tax Court judges). Exemption of teaching compensation of retired judges for limitation on outside earned income. After retirement, Tax Court judges should have the same ability to teach as District Court judges. General provisions relating to magistrate judges of the Tax Court. "Magistrate" is more recognizable to the American public because it is the term used by Article III courts. The provision changes the term "Special Trial Judge" to "Magistrate Judge of the United States Tax Court" and provides for alignment of term of office and removal applicable to District Court magistrate judges. Annuities to surviving spouses and dependent children of magistrate judges of the Tax Court. This section gives Magistrates/Special Trial Judges the same advantages as Tax Court judges, thus ensuring a greater pool of participants in the fund. Retirement and annuity program for magistrate judges. A retirement and annuity program more aligned with District Court Magistrates and the Tax Court judges is key for attracting and retaining qualified judges. Incumbent magistrate judges of the Tax Court. The provision provides transition rules similar to those given to the District Court magistrate judges. Provisions for recall. Article III judges are "self- recalling" (i.e., they decide for themselves whether they are recalled). In contrast, Tax Court judges are subject mandatory recall by the Chief Judge. These provisions authorize the recall in a manner similar to those now applicable to the regular judges of the Court.
Mr. President, I rise today to support the United States Tax Court Modernization Act. I am pleased to be an original cosponsor of this important legislation along with Senators Hatch, Grassley and Lincoln.
In 1969, Congress elevated the U.S. Tax Court as a Federal court of record under Article I of the Constitution of the United States. Congress created the Tax Court to provide a judicial forum in which affected persons could dispute tax deficiencies determined by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service prior to payment of the disputed amounts. That means that the Tax Court's jurisdictional requirements are, in part, a recognition that lower and middle income taxpayers cannot necessarily pay the tax deficiency before taking their dispute to court.
Congress also closely linked the legislation governing the Tax Court with the laws governing the Article III District Courts. Unfortunately, the Congress did not include the Tax Court in the changes made for Article III courts.
This legislation is designed to restore parity between the Tax Court and Article III courts, and to modernize their personnel and pension systems.
I thank Senator Hatch for sponsoring the legislation. I also want to thank former Senator Breaux, who sponsored the legislation in the last Congress and who was a strong advocate for the Tax Court as well as this package of modernization provisions.
This modernization package is non-controversial and long overdue. In the 108th Congress, the Finance Committee passed the Tax Court legislation three times: as a stand alone bill, as part of the National Employee Savings and Trust Equity Guarantee Act, and as part of the Tax Administration Good Government Act.
The Finance Committee intends to mark-up the United States Tax Court Modernization Act next month. I fully expect the Committee to once again unanimously pass the legislation. I also hope that, soon after Committee action, Majority Leader Frist and Minority Leader Reid will bring the United States Tax Court Modernization Act to the floor for swift passage.
 By Ms. COLLINS (for herself, Mr. Carper, and Mr. Voinovich):
S. 662. A bill to reform the postal laws of the United States; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
Mr. President, I rise today with my friend and colleague, Senator Carper, to introduce the Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act of 2005, a bill designed to help the 225-year-old Postal Service meet the challenges of the 21st Century. This legislation represents the culmination of a process that began in the summer of 2002 when I introduced a bill to establish a Presidential Commission charged with examining the problems the Postal Service faces, and developing specific recommendations and legislative proposals that Congress and the Postal Service could implement.
I originally introduced the Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act last May. In June of 2004, the bill was unanimously reported out of the the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee. That bill, S. 2468, had the strong endorsements of the National Rural Letter Carriers Association, the National Association of Letter Carriers, the National Association of Postmasters of the United States, and the Coalition for a 21st Century Postal Service — which represents thousands of the major mailers, employee groups, small businesses, and other users of the mail. It also had the strong bi-partisan support of twenty-two members of the United States Senate. Unfortunately, due to a variety of factors, my efforts to have the bill considered before the full Senate were stalled.
Since last Fall, Administration representatives have become actively engaged in postal reform efforts, and have given me their commitment to working with Congress to ensure passage of a reform bill this year. I have every expectation that this will be the year comprehensive postal reform legislation is signed into law.
It has long been acknowledged that the financial and operational problems confronting the Postal Service are serious. At present, the Postal Service has more than $90 billion in unfunded liabilities and obligations, which include $1.8 billion in debt to the U.S. Treasury, $7.6 billion for Workers' Compensation claims, $3.5 billion for retirement costs, and as much as $47 billion to cover retiree health care costs. The Government Accountability Office's Comptroller General, David Walker, has pointed to the urgent need for "fundamental reforms to minimize the risk of a significant taxpayer bailout or dramatic postal rate increases." The Postal Service has been on GAO's "High-Risk" List since April of 2001. The Postal Service is at risk of a "death spiral" of decreasing volume and increasing rates that lead to further decreases in volume.
In December of 2003, President Bush announced the creation of a bipartisan commission charged with identifying the operational, structural, and financial challenges facing the U.S. Postal Service. The President charged this commission with examining all significant aspects of the Postal Service with the goal of recommending legislative and administrative reforms to ensure its long-term viability.
The President's Commission conducted seven public hearings across the country at which they heard from numerous witnesses. On July 31, 2003, the Commission released its final report, making 35 legislative and administrative recommendations for the reform of the Postal Service.
As I read through the Commission's report, I was struck by what I considered the Commission's wake up call to Congress: its statement that "an incremental approach to Postal Service reform will yield too little, too late given the enterprise's bleak fiscal outlook, the depth of current debt and unfunded obligations, the downward trend in First-Class mail volumes and the limited potential of its legacy postal network that was built for a bygone era." That is a very strong statement, and one that challenged both the Postal Service and Congress to embrace far-reaching reforms.
To the relief of many, including myself, the Commission did not recommend privatization of the Postal Service. Instead, the Commission sought to find a way for the Postal Service to do, as Co-Chair Jim Johnson described to me, "an overwhelmingly better job under the same general structure."
The Postal Service plays a vital role in our economy. The Service itself employs more than 750,000 career employees. Less well known is the fact that it is also the linchpin of a $900-billion mailing industry that employs 9 million Americans in fields as diverse as direct mailing, printing, catalog production, paper manufacturing, and financial services. The health of the Postal Service is essential to the vitality of thousands of companies and the millions that they employ.
One of the greatest challenges for the Postal Service is the decrease in mail volume as business communications, bills and payments move more and more to the Internet. The Postal Service has experienced declining volumes of First-Class mail for three straight years. This is highly significant, given that First-Class mail accounts for 48 percent of total mail volume, and the revenue it generates pays for more than two-thirds of the Postal Service's institutional costs.
The Postal Service also faces the difficult task of trying to cut costs from its nationwide infrastructure and transportation network. These costs are difficult to cut. Even though volumes may be decreasing, carriers must still deliver six days a week to more than 139 million addresses.
As Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, I held a series of eight hearings, including a joint hearing with the House, during which we reviewed the recommendations of the President's Commission. The bill Senator Carper and I introduce today reflects what the Committee learned from dozens of witnesses.
First and foremost, the Collins-Carper bill preserves the basic features of universal service — affordable rates, frequent delivery, and convenient community access to retail postal services. As a Senator representing a large, rural State, I want to ensure that my constituents living in the northern woods, or on the islands, or in our many rural small towns have the same access to postal services as the people of our cities. If the Postal Service were no longer to provide universal service and deliver mail to every customer, the affordable communication link upon which many Americans rely would be jeopardized. Most commercial enterprises would find it uneconomical, if not impossible, to deliver mail and packages to rural Americans at rates charged by the Postal Service.
The Collins-Carper bill allows the Postal Service to maintain its current mail monopoly, and retain its sole access to customer mailboxes. It grants the Postal Service Board of Governors the authority to set rates for competitive products like Express Mail and Parcel Post, as long as these prices do not result in cross subsidy from market-dominant products. As a safeguard, our bill establishes a 30 day prior review period during which the proposed rate changes shall be reviewed by the Postal Regulatory Commission.
It replaces the current lengthy and litigious rate-setting process with a rate cap-based structure for market-dominant products such as First-Class Mail, periodicals and library mail. This would allow the Postal Service to react more quickly to changes in the mailing industry. The rate caps would be linked to the Consumer Price Index. The goal would be to make rate increases more predictable and less frequent and to provide incentives for the Postal Service to operate efficiently. Price changes for market-dominant products would be subject to a 45 day prior review period by the Postal Regulatory Commission.
Our bill would introduce new safeguards against unfair competition by the Postal Service in competitive markets. Subsidization of competitive products by market-dominant products would be expressly forbidden, and an equitable allocation of institutional costs to competitive products would be required.
The President's Commission recommended that the regulator be granted the authority to make changes to the Postal Service's universal service obligation and monopoly. The vast majority of the postal community, however, shared my belief that these are important policy determinations that should be retained by Congress. The Collins-Carper bill keeps those public policy decisions in congressional hands.
The existing Postal Rate Commission would be transformed into the Postal Regulatory Commission with greatly enhanced authority. Under current law, the Rate Commission has very narrow authority. We wanted to ensure that the Postal Service management has both greater latitude and stronger oversight. Among other things, the Postal Regulatory Commission will have the authority to regulate rates for non-competitive products and services; ensure financial transparency; establish limits on the accumulation of retained earnings by the Postal Service; obtain information from the Postal Service, if need be, through the use of new subpoena power; and review and act on complaints filed by those who believe the Postal Service has exceeded its authority. Members of the Postal Regulatory Board will be selected solely on the basis of their demonstrated experience and professional standing. Senate confirmation of all Board Members will be required.
To meet the Presidential Commission's call for increased financial transparency, the Collins-Carper bill will require the Postal Service to file with the Postal Regulatory Commission certain Securities and Exchange Commission financial disclosure forms, along with detailed annual reports on the status of the Postal Service's pension and postretirement health obligations.
The Governmental Affairs Committee dedicated two hearings to the examination of the Commission's workforce-related recommendations. The Postal Service is a highly labor intensive organization, using $3 out of every $4 to pay the wages and benefits of its employees. Their workforce is comprised of more than 700,000 dedicated letter carriers, clerks, mail handlers, postmasters, and others, many of whom place great value on their right to collectively bargain. Our bill reaffirms that right. This bill only makes changes to the bargaining process that have been agreed to by both the Postal Service and the four major unions. We replace the rarely used fact-finding process with mediation, and shorten statutory deadlines for certain phases of the bargaining process.
Additionally, the Collins-Carper bill corrects what I believe to be an anomaly in the federal workers' compensation law that results in high costs for the Postal Service. Under the Federal Employees Compensation Act (FECA), federal employees with dependents are eligible for 75 percent of their take-home pay, tax free, plus cost of living allowances. In addition, there is no maximum dollar cap on FECA payments. As a result, employees often opt not to retire, staying on the more generous workers' compensation program permanently.
According to a March 2003 audit issued by the Postal Service's Office of Inspector General, the Postal Service's workers' compensation rolls include 81 cases that originated 40 to 50 years ago, with the oldest recipient being 102 years old. The IG's office found 778 cases that originated 30 to 40 years ago; and 1,189 cases that originated 20 to 29 years ago.
The Collins-Carper bill works to protect the financial resources of the Postal Service by converting workers' compensation benefits for total or partial disability to a retirement annuity when the affected employee reaches 65 years of age. This change would reflect the fact that disabled postal employees would likely retire at some point were they not receiving workers' compensation. I would like to note that the average postal employee retires far earlier than age 65, so this is still a generous program. It is important to point out that the Postal Service has reduced their workplace injury rate by twenty-eight percent over the past three years.
The Collins — Carper bill also puts into place a three-day waiting period before an employee is eligible to receive 45 days of continuation of pay. This is consistent with every state's workers' compensation program that requires a three- to seven-day waiting period before benefits are paid.
To address the President's Commission's recommendation for improved executive compensation, this bill will allow the Postal Service to raise their overall executive compensation level from Executive Level 1 to that of the Vice President. This would bring the Postal Service in line with authority granted to federal agencies. This new authority will be contingent upon the development of a meaningful performance appraisal system.
Our bill has reached an important compromise on the issue of workshare discounts. The workshare program was developed by the Postal Service and the Postal Rate Commission to enable customers to pay lower rates when they perform mail preparation or transportation activities. The language in our bill supports the principle that workshare discounts should generally not exceed the costs that the Postal Service avoids as a result of the worksharing activity. However, the bill spells out certain circumstances under which workshare discounts in excess of avoided costs are warranted.
Finally, our bill would repeal a provision of Public Law 108-18 which requires that money owed to the Postal Service due to an overpayment into the Civil Service Retirement System Fund be held in an escrow account. Repealing this provision would essentially "free up" $78 billion over a period of 60 years. These savings would be used to not only pay off debt to the U.S. Treasury and to fund health care liabilities, but also to mitigate rate increases as well. In fact, failure to release these escrow funds could mean, for mailers, a double-digit rate increase in 2006 — an expense most American businesses and many consumers are ill-equipped to afford.
The bill would also return to the Department of Treasury the responsibility for funding CSRS pension benefits relating to the military service of postal retirees. No other agency is required to make this payment. Ratepayers should not be held responsible for this $27 billion obligation.
The Postal Service has reached a critical juncture. If we are to save and strengthen this vital service upon which so many Americans rely for communication and their livelihoods, the time to act is now.
I look forward to working with all of my colleagues in the Senate, and House Government Reform and Oversight Committee Chairman Tom Davis, who, together with Congressman John McHugh, also recently introduced a postal reform bill, H.R. 22.
I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the Record.
 There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the "Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act". (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the "Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act". (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows:Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the "Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act". (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows:Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.TITLE I — DEFINITIONS; POSTAL SERVICES
(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the "Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act". (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows:Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.TITLE I — DEFINITIONS; POSTAL SERVICESSec. 101. Definitions.Sec. 102. Postal services.
(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the "Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act". (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows:Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.TITLE I — DEFINITIONS; POSTAL SERVICESSec. 101. Definitions.Sec. 102. Postal services.TITLE II — MODERN RATE REGULATION
Section 102 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking "and" at the end of paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (4) and inserting a semicolon, and by adding at the end the following: "(5) `postal service' refers to the physical delivery of letters, printed matter, or packages weighing up to 70 pounds, including physical acceptance, collection, sorting, transportation, or other functions ancillary thereto; "(6) `product' means a postal service with a distinct cost or market characteristic for which a rate or rates are applied; "(7) `rates', as used with respect to products, includes fees for postal services; "(8) `market-dominant product' or `product in the market- dominant category of mail' means a product subject to subchapter I of chapter 36; and "(9) `competitive product' or `product in the competitive category of mail' means a product subject to subchapter II of chapter 36; and "(10) `year', as used in chapter 36 (other than subchapters I and VI thereof), means a fiscal year.".
(a) In General.--Section 404 of title 39, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking paragraph (6) and by redesignating paragraphs (7) through (9) as paragraphs (6) through (8), respectively; and (2) by adding at the end the following: "(c) Except as provided in section 411, nothing in this title shall be considered to permit or require that the Postal Service provide any special nonpostal or similar services.". (b) Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 1402(b)(1)(B)(ii) of the Victims of Crime Act of 1984 (98 Stat. 2170; 42 U.S.C. 10601(b)(1)(B)(ii)) is amended by striking "404(a)(8)" and inserting "404(a)(7)". (2) Section 2003(b)(1) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking "and nonpostal".
(a) In General.--Chapter 36 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking sections 3621 and 3622 and inserting the following:
Chapter 36 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3629 the following:

Today I wish to commend Congressman Bobby Rush and other members of the Congressional Black Caucus for their work on behalf of Afro-Colombians. The consistent advocacy of the CBC on this human rights issue has been critical to increasing consciousness and activism in the U.S. and Colombia. Significant progress has made through this alliance, and I look forward to working with the CBC and other community groups on this issue.
Throughout Latin America, Afro-Latino communities remain marginalized — socially, economically and politically. In the case of Colombia, the violence and disruption of the country's 40-year civil conflict have disproportionately affected Afro-Colombians. Many are now refugees in their own country after being forced to leave their homes, and they face widespread racial discrimination as they try to rebuild their lives. Although Colombia's 1991 Constitution granted Afro-Colombians territorial rights to the land they historically held, these rights are now being increasingly violated, as this land is taken from them. With little or no economic and educational opportunities available, many Afro-Colombian youths have turned to coca cultivation or joined guerrilla forces.
With the rise of Afro-Colombian advocacy groups and NGOs in Colombia, I believe it is possible to foster meaningful partnerships and alliances for positive change in this region. In addition to the CBC, there are many members of the religious community — in my home State of Illinois and across our country — who are working on behalf of Afro-Colombians. I commend them on their dedication to this important cause. Together we can and will make a difference.

 There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
This Act may be cited as the "Rural Schools Geography Act".
Congress makes the following findings: (1) There are significant differences between urban and rural school districts with regard to student transportation, distances between schools and school districts, and school of choice options. Local educational agencies (LEAs) in rural areas often have only 1 school servicing a particular grade- level, and the distance between these schools is often much greater than in urban areas. These differences are not addressed by existing guidelines under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. (2) In 2000, rural schools (those in communities with populations below 2,500) taught 32 percent of the children in the United States, but rural schools accounted for $5,670,000,000 of the Nation's spending on school transportation, or nearly half of such spending. (3) Rural transportation costs, per-pupil, are double that of urban transportation costs. As a percentage of total spending, rural areas spend 77 percent more than urban areas for education transportation. (4) Commutes in rural areas are much more likely to be on rougher, unpaved roads. This not only undermines the physical health of the students, but makes transportation during poor weather much more difficult or impossible. Students with longer commutes are more likely to miss school because of inclement weather. School attendance is an important factor in school performance. (5) School students who have long commutes actively avoid advanced and high-level courses because they do not have time for the extra homework. This self-imposed restriction retards maximization of educational potential. (6) Students with long commutes are less likely to engage in in-home and out-of-home activities, such as family dinners, after-school jobs, and athletic or musical extracurricular activities. Participation in these activities benefits overall educational progress. (7) Section 1116(b)(10)(C) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 instructs that the lowest achieving children be given priority for out-of-district transportation. Thus, the negative impacts of long commutes disproportionately affect the very students who need the most help.
Section 1116 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6316) is amended by adding at the end the following: "(i) Geography Limits.--Notwithstanding subsections (b) and (c), a local educational agency shall not be required to provide a student the option to transfer to another school pursuant to this section if providing the option is impractical due to the distance to be traveled, a geographical barrier or hazard, the duration of the travel, or an unusually high cost of travel.".
The Secretary of Education, not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, shall promulgate such regulations as the Secretary determines necessary to implement this Act.
 By Mr. OBAMA (for himself and Mr. Inouye):
S. 697. A bill to amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to improve higher education, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
Mr. President, I rise today to introduce the Higher Education Opportunity Through Pell Grant Expansion Act of 2005, or HOPE Act.
Right now, in schools, playgrounds, and backyards across America, children are dreaming about what they want to be when they grow up. As tomorrow's astronauts, doctors, and teachers dream about their futures, their parents know that so many of those dreams are dependent on a college diploma.
The families I have met in Illinois are worried that they might not be able to give their kids a chance at that diploma. Everywhere I go, I hear the same story: we work hard, we pay our bills, we cut corners, and we put away savings, but we just don't know if it is going to be enough when the tuition bill comes in the mail.
The facts and statistics are not encouraging. College tuition is rising at a stunning rate of almost 10 percent a year, and over the last 25 years it is gone up an astounding 519 percent. Because of these rising prices, over 200,000 students were priced out of a college education last year.
In a country with so much wealth and opportunity for education, it is difficult to imagine there are parents who are forced to say to their kids: "We're sorry. We can't afford to send you to college." None of us in the Senate should rest until those parents can start saying "yes" to their kids.
This bill would start us down that path by increasing access to Pell grants. Today, these need-based awards are used by 5.3 million undergraduate students to fund their education. Unfortunately, the awards just haven't kept up with the rising price of tuition or even inflation. As a result, the current $4,050 Pell grant maximum is $700 less in real terms than the maximum grant 30 years ago. Pell grants now cover only 23 percent of the total cost of the average 4-year public college.
The HOPE Act would correct this problem by raising the Pell grant maximum to $5,100, and it would continue to raise this maximum in future years to keep up with inflation. The bill also would make sure that no student sees a reduction in Pell grant assistance due to recent changes in the eligibility formula.
Because working families are already burdened with too many taxes, this bill would not add to the deficit or raise a dime of taxes. Instead, it will close two loopholes that guarantee banks and private lenders an additional $2 billion in taxpayer subsidies every year on top of the interest that college students and their families are already paying on their loans. In a country where 200,000 students were priced out of college last year, our tax dollars shouldn't be spent subsidizing banks that are already making record profits.
When our children dream about their future, they need to know those dreams are within their reach. A college education forms the foundation of the opportunity society that will keep this country strong and growing in the 21st century. I know we can work together to get this done, and I look forward to doing so.
I urge my colleagues to support the HOPE Act.
I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the Record.
 There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
This Act may be cited as the "Higher Education Opportunity Through Pell Grant Expansion Act".
(a) Findings.--The Senate makes the following findings: (1) Federal Pell Grants are need-based and are used by 5,300,000 undergraduate students to fund their college educations. (2) Over 90 percent of Federal Pell Grant recipients come from a family with a combined income of less than $40,000. (3) Because of the rising cost of college tuition, the maximum Federal Pell Grant amount of $4,050 for academic year 2004-2005 is $700 less in real terms than the maximum Federal Pell Grant amount for academic year 1975-1976. (4) Federal Pell Grants for academic year 2003-2004 cover only 23 percent of the total cost of the average 4-year public college. (b) Sense of the Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that-- (1) eligible undergraduate students should receive the maximum Federal Pell Grant amount established by the amendment made by section 3(b) of this Act; and (2) sufficient funds should be appropriated to allow the awarding of the maximum Federal Pell Grant amount for which students are eligible pursuant to the amendment made by section 3(b) of this Act.
(a) Appropriation of Funds for Federal Pell Grants.--In addition to any amounts otherwise appropriated to carry out subpart 1 of part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a) for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2006, there are authorized to be appropriated and there are appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2006, for carrying out such subpart 1, an additional $2,000,000,000. (b) Authorization Amount and Maximum Federal Pell Grant.-- Section 401(b)(2)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a(b)(2)(A)) is amended to read as follows: "(2)(A)(i) The amount of a Federal Pell Grant for a student eligible under this part shall be $5,100 for academic year 2005-2006, less an amount equal to the amount determined to be the expected family contribution with respect to that student for that year. "(ii) The Secretary shall cumulatively adjust the amount in clause (i) every 2 academic years beginning with academic year 2006-2007 to account for any percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor.".
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the annual updates to the allowance for State and other taxes in the tables used in the Federal Needs Analysis Methodology to determine a student's expected family contribution for the award year 2005-2006 under part F of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087kk et seq.), published in the Federal Register on Thursday, December 23, 2004 (69 Fed. Reg. 76926), shall not apply to a student to the extent the updates will increase the student's expected family contribution under such part F.
Section 438(b)(2)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-1(b)(2)(B)) is amended by striking clause (v) and inserting the following: "(v) This subparagraph shall not apply to-- "(I) any loan made or purchased after the date of enactment of the Higher Education Opportunity Through Pell Grant Expansion Act; "(II) any loan that had not qualified before such date of enactment for receipt of a special allowance payment determined under this subparagraph; or "(III) any loan made or purchased before such date of enactment with funds described in the first or second sentence of clause (i) if--
Section 438(b)(2)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087-1(b)(2)(B)) is amended by striking clause (v) and inserting the following: "(v) This subparagraph shall not apply to-- "(I) any loan made or purchased after the date of enactment of the Higher Education Opportunity Through Pell Grant Expansion Act; "(II) any loan that had not qualified before such date of enactment for receipt of a special allowance payment determined under this subparagraph; or "(III) any loan made or purchased before such date of enactment with funds described in the first or second sentence of clause (i) if--"(aa) the obligation described in the first such sentence has, after such date of enactment, matured, or been retired or defeased; or "(bb) the maturity date or the date of retirement of the obligation described in the first such sentence has, after such date of enactment, been extended.".
 By Mr. BAUCUS (for himself, Mr. Bunning, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Talent, and Mr. Craig):
S. 702. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to repeal the occupational taxes relating to distilled spirits, wine, and beer; to the Committee on Finance.
Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that I join my colleagues Senators Bunning, Johnson and Talent today in introducing legislation that will repeal the special occupational tax on taxpayers who manufacture, distribute, and sell alcoholic beverages.
The special occupational tax is not a tax on alcoholic products, but rather operates as a license fee on businesses. The tax is imposed on those engaged in the business of selling alcohol beverages. Believe it or not, this tax was originally established to help finance the Civil War. That war is over, and this inequitable tax has outlived its original purpose. Repealing the SOT will also simplify the tax code for thousands of small businesses.
The SOT on alcohol dramatically increased during the budget process in 1988 and has unfairly burdened business owners across the country since. From Thompson Falls to Sidney, from Chinook to Billings, small businesses are burdened with yet another tax in the form of the SOT. According to the Alcohol and Tobacco, Tax and Trade Bureau, there are 426,193 locations nationwide that pay the SOT every year, including 399,657 retailers. These retail establishments account for $99 million out of $103 million collected in SOT revenues.
In Montana, there are 2,969 locations which together pay nearly $1 million in the SOT every year. Seasonal resorts in Whitefish and Yellowstone, "mom and pop" convenience stores in Butte, and bowling alleys, flower shops, and restaurants across Montana, and the United States, pay the Federal Government over $100 million per year for the privilege of running businesses that sell beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages.
The SOT is extremely regressive. Retailers must annually pay $250 per location; wholesalers pay $500; vintners and distillers pay $1,000. Because the SOT is levied on a per location basis, a sole proprietorship must pay the same amount as one of the nation's largest retailers, and locally-owned chains having to pay per location, would have to pay as much as, if not more than, the nation's largest single site brewery. This is not what Congress had in mind 150 years ago, and I don't believe it's a situation we want today.
Repealing the SOT on alcohol is supported by a broad-based group of business organizations and enjoys wide-spread bipartisan support on Capitol Hill. Last year, we made progress in ending this burdensome tax on small businesses. We repealed the tax for three years. More can be done. Business owners across the United States deserve assurance that they won't be hit with this antiquated tax down the line.
The legislation preserves the TTB's record-keeping requirements, while removing the agency's enforcement burden, and will save over $2 million per year. The GAO examined SOT efficacy several times, and found it fundamentally flawed. The Joint Committee on Taxation called for the elimination of SOT in its June 2001 simplification study.
More than 90 percent of all SOT revenue comes from retailers — a great majority of those are small businesses. Our small business sector is a great strength of our economy. President Bush has said that the best way to encourage job growth is to let small businesses keep more of their own money, so they can invest in their business and make it easier for somebody to find work. Repealing the SOT would provide an immediate and visible tax cut to small business owners.
In recent months, there has been much talk of tax reform inside the beltway. President Bush has made tax reform one of his key priorities and established a panel that will make recommendations to the Department of Treasury for a better tax system. Getting rid of a tax that has outlived its original purpose is one small step toward reform that makes sense for Montana and our country. We urge our colleagues to join us in this endeavor.
I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the Record.
 There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
(a) Repeal of Occupational Taxes.-- (1) In general.--The following provisions of part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to occupational taxes) are hereby repealed: (A) Subpart A (relating to proprietors of distilled spirits plants, bonded wine cellars, etc.). (B) Subpart B (relating to brewer). (C) Subpart D (relating to wholesale dealers) (other than sections 5114 and 5116). (D) Subpart E (relating to retail dealers) (other than section 5124). (E) Subpart G (relating to general provisions) (other than sections 5142, 5143, 5145, and 5146). (2) Nonbeverage domestic drawback.--Section 5131 of such Code is amended by striking ", on payment of a special tax per annum,". (3) Industrial use of distilled spirits.--Section 5276 of such Code is hereby repealed. (b) Conforming Amendments.-- (1)(A) The heading for part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the table of subparts for such part are amended to read as follows:
(a) Repeal of Occupational Taxes.-- (1) In general.--The following provisions of part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to occupational taxes) are hereby repealed: (A) Subpart A (relating to proprietors of distilled spirits plants, bonded wine cellars, etc.). (B) Subpart B (relating to brewer). (C) Subpart D (relating to wholesale dealers) (other than sections 5114 and 5116). (D) Subpart E (relating to retail dealers) (other than section 5124). (E) Subpart G (relating to general provisions) (other than sections 5142, 5143, 5145, and 5146). (2) Nonbeverage domestic drawback.--Section 5131 of such Code is amended by striking ", on payment of a special tax per annum,". (3) Industrial use of distilled spirits.--Section 5276 of such Code is hereby repealed. (b) Conforming Amendments.-- (1)(A) The heading for part II of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the table of subparts for such part are amended to read as follows:"PART II — MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.

Mr. President, I rise today to urge my colleagues to think about the implications of what has been called the nuclear option and what effect that might have on this Chamber and on this country. I urge all of us to think not just about winning every debate but about protecting free and democratic debate.
During my Senate campaign, I had the privilege and opportunity to meet Americans from all walks of life and both ends of the political spectrum. They told me about their lives, about their hopes, about the issues that matter to them, and they also told me what they think about Washington.
Because my colleagues have heard it themselves, I know it will not surprise many of them to learn that a lot of people do not think much gets done around here on issues about which they care the most. They think the atmosphere has become too partisan, the arguments have become too nasty, and the political agendas have become too petty.
While I have not been here too long, I have noticed that partisan debate is sharp, and dissent is not always well received. Honest differences of opinion and principled compromise often seem to be the victim of a determination to score points against one's opponents.
But the American people sent us here to be their voice. They understand that those voices can at times become loud and argumentative, but they also hope we can disagree without being disagreeable. At the end of the day, they expect both parties to work together to get the people's business done.
What they do not expect is for one party, be it Republican or Democrat, to change the rules in the middle of the game so they can make all the decisions while the other party is told to sit down and keep quiet.
The American people want less partisanship in this town, but everyone in this Chamber knows that if the majority chooses to end the filibuster, if they choose to change the rules and put an end to democratic debate, then the fighting, the bitterness, and the gridlock will only get worse.
I understand that Republicans are getting a lot of pressure to do this from factions outside the Chamber, but we need to rise above "the ends justify the means" mentality because we are here to answer to the people — all of the people, not just the ones who are wearing our particular party label.
The fact is that both parties have worked together to confirm 95 percent of this President's judicial nominees. The Senate has accepted 205 of his 214 selections. In fact, we just confirmed another one of the President's judges this week by a vote of 95 to 0. Overall, this is a better record than any President has had in the last 25 years. For a President who received 51 percent of the vote and a Senate Chamber made up of 55 percent of the President's party, I would say that confirming 95 percent of their judicial nominations is a record to be proud of.
Again, I urge my Republican colleagues not to go through with changing these rules. In the long run, it is not a good result for either party. One day Democrats will be in the majority again, and this rule change will be no fairer to a Republican minority than it is to a Democratic minority.
I sense that talk of the nuclear option is more about power than about fairness. I believe some of my colleagues propose this rule change because they can get away with it rather than because they know it is good for our democracy.
Right now we are faced with rising gas prices, skyrocketing tuition costs, a record number of uninsured Americans, and some of the most serious national security threats we have ever had, while our bravest young men and women are risking their lives halfway around the world to keep us safe. These are challenges we all want to meet and problems we all want to solve, even if we do not always agree on how to do it. But if the right of free and open debate is taken away from the minority party and the millions of Americans who ask us to be their voice, I fear the partisan atmosphere in Washington will be poisoned to the point where no one will be able to agree on anything. That does not serve anybody's best interest, and it certainly is not what the patriots who founded this democracy had in mind. We owe the people who sent us here more than that. We owe them much more.
Mr. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.

Mr. President, I ask that the quorum call be dispensed with.

Mr. President, today I am offering an amendment to the fiscal year 2005 emergency supplemental which I am pleased to announce is being cosponsored by Senators Corzine, Bingaman, and Graham. This amendment would meet certain needs of our injured service members in recognition of the tremendous sacrifice they have made in defense of our country.
The other day I had the opportunity to visit some of our wounded heroes at Walter Reed Army Medical Center. I know many of you have made the same trip. I heard about their visits, but there is nothing that can fully prepare you for what you see when you take that first step into the physical therapy room.
These are kids in there, our kids, the ones we watched grow up, the ones we hoped would live lives that were happy, healthy, and safe. These kids left their homes and families for a dangerous place halfway around the world. After years of being protected by their parents, these kids risk their lives to protect us. Now some of them have come home from that war with scars that may change their lives forever, scars that may never heal. Yet they sit there in the hospital so full of hope and still so proud of their country. They are the best that America has to offer, and they deserve our highest respect, and they deserve our help.
Recently, I learned that some of our most severely wounded soldiers are being forced to pay for their own meals and their own phone calls while being treated in medical hospitals. Up until last year, there was a law on the books that prohibited soldiers from receiving both their basic subsistence allowance and free meals from the military. Basically, this law allowed the Government to charge our wounded heroes for food while they were recovering from their war injuries. Thankfully, this body acted to change this law in 2003 so that wounded soldiers would not have to pay for their meals. But we are dealing with a bureaucracy here and, as we know, nothing is ever simple in a bureaucracy. So now, because the Department of Defense does not consider getting physical rehabilitation or therapy services in a medical hospital as being hospitalized, there are wounded veterans who still do not qualify for the free meals other veterans receive. After 90 days, even those classified as hospitalized on an outpatient status lose their free meals as well.
Also, while our soldiers in the field qualify for free phone service, injured service men and women who may be hospitalized hundreds or thousands of miles from home do not receive this same benefit. For soldiers whose family members are not able to take off work and travel to a military hospital, hearing the familiar voice of mom or dad or husband or wife on the other side of the phone can make all the difference in the world. Yet right now our Government will not help pay for these calls, and it will not help pay for these meals.
Now, think about the sacrifices these young people have made for their country, many of them literally sacrificing life and in some cases limb. Now, at $8.30 a meal, they could end up with a $250 bill from the Government that sent them to war, and they could get that bill every single month. This is wrong, and we have a moral obligation to fix it. The amendment I am offering today will do this.
The amendment will expand the group of hospitalized soldiers who cannot be charged for their meals to include those service members undergoing medical recuperation, therapy, or otherwise on "medical hold." The number of people affected by this amendment will be small. Only about 4,000 service members are estimated to fall under the category of non-hospitalized. The amendment is retroactive to January 1, 2005, in an effort to provide those injured service members who may have already received bills for their meals with some relief from these costs.
The amendment will also extend free phone service to those injured service members who are hospitalized or otherwise undergoing medical recuperation or therapy. I am very proud this amendment is supported by the American Legion, and I hope my colleagues will join them in that support. I ask all of my colleagues to join me in supporting this amendment. It should be something that is very simple for us to do. These are our children and they risked their lives for us. When they come home with injuries, we should be expected to provide them the best possible service and the best possible support. This is a small price to pay for those who have sacrificed so much for their country.
I want to mention and extend my thanks to the senior Senator from Alaska and my colleague from Mississippi for working with me on this issue. I am hoping that we can reach an agreement on this bill.

Yes, I do. DOD currently charges soldiers $8.30 per day for meals at the nondiscounted rate. So if all the eligible soldiers ate all of their meals at military facilities through the end of this fiscal year, the amendment would cost about $10.2 million. Now, that is probably a high estimate because my expectation would be these wounded soldiers would not be eating all of their meals at the hospital. So it would probably end up being lower, but the upper threshold would be $10.2 million.

I thank my colleague, the Senator from Mississippi, for that offer, and I believe all of us feel the same way. These are the soldiers that are most severely wounded. We want to take the very best care of them, and I very much appreciate the consideration of the Senator from Mississippi.

Mr. President, I thank the senior Senator from Alaska for joining me to discuss an issue of growing importance for our service members wounded in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Recently, USA Today reported that many of our injured soldiers are returning from Iraq with a condition known as traumatic brain injury, or TBI. Even though new technology and better body armor are helping soldiers survive bomb and rocket attacks, the blasts are still causing brain damage to them. As of January, 437 cases have been diagnosed in Army hospitals alone, and some doctors are saying that it could become the "signature wound of the Iraq war."
TBI is the greatest risk factor for developing epilepsy. In fact, a study of Vietnam vets showed that 51 percent of those who suffered TBI went on to develop this disorder. That is why I filed an amendment to provide $1 million to the Department of Defense Peer Reviewed Medical Research Program for epilepsy research — including research on the relationship between TBI and epilepsy. The Epilepsy Foundation of America supports the amendment.
However, I understand that this important issue is more appropriately addressed in the fiscal year 2006 appropriations process. With that understanding, I will not offer the amendment at this time.

I look forward to working with the Senator from Alaska on this issue. Because epilepsy is a disorder that remains latent for many years, it is important that we work now to better understand the relationship between TBI and epilepsy and prevent the onset of epilepsy in these service members.

Mr. President, I speak in favor of the amendment offered by the distinguished chairman and ranking member of the Veterans Affairs Committee.
A few weeks ago, I met with Sergeants Ryan Kelly, Jeremy Feldbusch, and Heath Calhoun, all of whom had recently returned from Iraq. They served their country bravely in battle, and in doing so, each of these men sustained a disabling injury that will change their lives forever.
When they came home, it would have been easy for them to go about their own business or feel sorry for themselves.
But they did not. Instead, they decided that their service to our country would not end on the battlefields of Iraq. They would speak out for their fellow soldiers — the ones who also may come home without a leg, or an arm, or their sight, but may not have the resources to carry on and support their families.
This amendment is their tribute to their brothers and sisters-in-arms.
For only about $3 per month, it allows service members to purchase group disability insurance that would award them a maximum of $100,000 if they are deemed seriously injured. For disabled veterans who may not be able to work when they come home, this insurance could help them obtain long-term care, send their kids to school, or simply make sure that they can pay the bills and still put food on the table. It won't cost the Government a dime. It simply needs our approval to allow it to happen.
The blessings of modern technology have saved the lives of many service members who would otherwise have died from their wounds. Yet, it also means there will be more wounded who need care. Every single one of us has a fundamental moral duty to take care of those men and women who've sacrificed to safeguard our freedom. This amendment offers us one way to do that, and I thank Senators Craig and Akaka for their cooperation in moving this issue forward. Mr. AKAKA. Mr. President, I am pleased to support this important and timely amendment.
This amendment will go far to ease the financial burden that is placed on a service member and his or her loved ones as a result of traumatic injury. Between $25,000 and $100,000 will be paid to service members who suffer such injuries based on severity of injury.
Service members and their families face heavy financial burdens while hospitalized, and prior to being medically discharged from the military. This effort will help lessen the burden that exists on service members and their families before VA benefits kick in.
Importantly, to qualify for this necessary benefit, our soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines do not have to do any additional paperwork. They are automatically enrolled in this program by virtue of being a participant in the Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance Program.
The insurance premium will cost the service member approximately $1 a month and will be determined by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
This insurance policy is meant to supplement, and not take the place of, existing DoD and VA benefits. This amendment is intended to fill a gap: assistance to service members and their families during recovery from a traumatic injury. In no way should anyone view this as a precedence for shifting costs to a service member.

I see that the distinguished ranking member of the State and Foreign Operations Subcommittee, Senator Leahy is here on the Senate floor. I am wondering it he would take just a moment to discuss with me the critical issue of the avian flu.
Mr. President, an outbreak of the avian flu would be an international calamity. In this age when you can get on a plane in Bangkok and arrive in Chicago or Burlington in hours, we must face the reality that this threat is not a problem isolated half a world away, but is one that could affect people in Illinois, Vermont, and all across America. The director of the Centers for Disease Control recognized the grave consequences this virus could pose to international health when she recently stated that "this is a very ominous situation for the globe . . . [this is] the most important threat we are facing right now." It is something that is clearly an emergency and is appropriately addressed in the Iraq Supplemental.
At this point, humans contract the virus overwhelmingly by coming into contact with infected animals, and once contracted, the virus is extremely deadly — a 65 to 75 percent mortality rate for humans — especially because there is no proven vaccine for the H5N1 strain. Further, effective treatments for this strain of the virus are not widely available and must be delivered within 24 hours.
The recent trends with respect to the spread of the avian flu are very alarming. Over the last few months, there is growing evidence which suggests that the virus may be mutating and could eventually result in a form that is transmittable from human to human. If this were to occur, it could cause the deaths of millions of people, seriously damage economic activity in Southeast Asia, and cause panic and instability throughout the region. Moreover, because of the dynamic nature of Southeast Asia, with all sorts of commerce and transport in and out of the region, the virus would likely spread around the world — including to the United States, in a matter of hours or days.
I would ask my good friend, the senior Senator from Vermont, who has a long history of leadership on international health issues. for his assessment of what needs to be done.

Just for the record, the $100 million figure is important for our purposes here today. Before the Appropriations Committee put together the supplemental, we discussed the importance of immediately addressing the avian flu before the situation spirals out of control, and that $25 million is an appropriate amount to deal with this critical emergency. I am correct?

Mr. President, I rise to speak about the budget resolution. I think that the budget process is one of those issues that doesn't translate too well outside of Washington. Most Americans know it involves a lot of fighting over a lot of numbers, but other than that what goes on here is largely obscured from public view.
Sometimes I think that is why Washington gets away with passing a budget like this one.
See, a budget is fundamentally about choices — not just choosing where to allocate funding — but where to place our most important values and priorities. And there are no free lunches here either.
We must choose — do we want to run up our debt with tax cuts and give the bill to our children, or do we want to get our fiscal house back in order? Do we want to hand more corporate tax breaks to companies with record profits while handing our veterans higher health care bills, or do we want to keep our promise to those willing to sacrifice in defense of our freedom? These are the very real choices a budget asks us to make. And they have equally real consequences on people's lives.
When we cut $10 billion from Medicaid, what does that say to the 53 million Americans — 25 million of whom are children — who rely on this program as their only source of health care? The thousands of seniors and kids in Illinois who will be turned away from a doctor's office when they get sick because we chose to end their coverage, what does that say to those Americans?
When we cut out a proposal to increase Pell grants that will send more kids to college, what does that say to the 220,000 who didn't attend last year for the simple reason that they couldn't afford it? What does it say to our kids who will have to compete with kids in India and China for jobs when we cut out proposals to provide new math and science teachers?
When we cut $351 million in funding for veterans' nursing homes and eliminate $100 million in State grants for VA facilities, what does that say to the veterans who have sacrificed for this Nation but who cannot seem to get this Nation to sacrifice anything for them? What does it say to these veterans when we provide only around 100 new employees to deal with a backlog of 480,000 compensation and pension claims that haven't even been looked at yet? And what does it say to the men and women who are willing to fight and die for this country when we are not doing much about the nearly 300,000 veterans who go to sleep without a roof over their heads every single night? What does that say to them? What do we say to them?
Maybe we tell them that the budget process is complicated; that we are in some tough times and have tough decisions to make; that we are not happy about the choices, but we have a huge deficit and no money left to spend.
Or maybe we tell them that we couldn't afford to do anything about these important problems because we chose to give out over $100 billion in tax breaks. $100 billion on top of the trillions in tax cuts we have already given out most of which have gone to those few who already have so much.
These tax cuts have driven us into the deepest debt in America's history and squandered our opportunity to deal with Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and the true costs of the war in Iraq. And yet when we try to do something fiscally responsible like pass an amendment that forces Congress to pay as it goes, we get rejected by those who want to keep borrowing and spending.
Right now, there are millions of middle-class families who are deeply in debt and struggling to pay the bills. This body couldn't wait to pass a bankruptcy bill to make sure they paid every penny of that debt, and yet it has now maxed out the country's credit card many times over. What does this say to Americans about taking responsibility for themselves?
A budget is about choices, and I believe the choices we have made here are just plain wrong.
In this budget, we should be meeting our responsibilities to our fellow Americans while still paying down the debt so we can meet our responsibilities to our children too. It doesn't have to be either-or — we can do both as long as we get our priorities in order. Many of us — Democrats and Republicans — have been trying to do this during the budget process. Unfortunately, the final product does not reflect those efforts. In the future, I hope that both parties can find a way to come together and make sure that America's budget reflects Americans' priorities.

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be dispensed with.

Mr. President, I rise today to speak about the fiscal year 2005 emergency supplemental appropriations bill. Every day in Iraq and Afghanistan, the men and women of the U.S. Armed Forces risk their lives to defend ours. They are completing a mission they did not ask for and, in Iraq, a mission that is longer and more dangerous than they were ever told. Yet amid roadside explosions, insurgent attacks, and the loss of some of their closest friends, they wake up each day and do their jobs. They wake up each day and do whatever it takes to leave a democratic Iraq for a free Iraqi people.
This bill is a way for us to support these efforts. With its passage, I sincerely hope our troops will receive all the support and all the equipment they need to do their job. With its passage, I hope we do not hear any more stories about troops driving convoys with unarmored humvees, or about troops going into battle with armor their parents had to send them from home for their birthday. And I sincerely hope this money will be used to train more Iraqis to secure their own country so we can bring home our young people safe and secure.
I particularly thank the chairman and ranking member of the Appropriations Committee for working with me on several other emergency spending needs.
I say to Senator Cochran, I appreciate that this bill provides $25 million for the prevention of the avian flu. As some of you may have read, the number of cases in Southeast Asia is increasing, and there is serious concern that this virus could mutate and jump from continent to continent, potentially causing a pandemic that could kill millions of people. We have to work proactively to prevent such a pandemic, and I appreciate the support from the committee chairman as well as the administration on this issue.
Also included in the bill is an amendment I sponsored with my friend from South Carolina, Senator Graham. This amendment will ensure that our injured service members who remain under medical care but are no longer hospitalized will not have to pay for their meals while receiving therapy. I thank the graciousness of Senator Cochran for adopting that amendment on the floor without debate.
I also joined with Senator Durbin to address the security needs of our judiciary. As some of my colleagues know, a Federal judge in Illinois recently suffered a tragic loss, the murder of her mother and her husband. This bill provides necessary funding for the U.S. Marshal Service to step up its security for our Federal judges.
I commend all those who have been involved, including the chairman, for crafting a number of important measures in this bill. I wish that I could, without any further statement, simply say how proud I am of our troops and move on with the supplemental. Unfortunately, this bill also includes some immigration provisions, known as REAL ID, that cause me enormous concern. Although I will certainly vote for the conference report because of the good measures I have already discussed, it is important to state for the record my serious reservations about REAL 
Despite the fact that almost all of these immigration provisions are controversial, the Senate did not conduct a full hearing or debate on any one of them. While they may do very little to increase homeland security, they come at a heavy price for struggling State budgets and our values as a compassionate country. The driver's license provisions in REAL ID, for example, will cost an estimated $100 million over 5 years. States will have to bear the majority of these costs. At a time when budgets are tight, I don't think we should be outsourcing our homeland security to States that can't afford it.
The cost to our Nation's legacy as a refuge for asylum seekers is also heavy. Conferees were able to improve some aspects of REAL ID, including increasing the limit on the number of foreigners who can apply for asylum in the United States, but other provisions intended to eliminate fraudulent asylum applications may end up denying asylum to people who deserve to receive it.
These are costs that call for greater examination. As a sovereign country, we have the right to control and identify those who enter and exit. I have worked with my colleagues to support hundreds of millions of dollars for more Border Patrol agents to help exercise that right. But controlling immigration is a Federal responsibility — it always has been — and it should not come at the expense of State budgets or basic civil liberties. We should have more time to examine and debate the REAL ID provisions as part of comprehensive immigration reform.
These provisions, currently in the bill, are opposed by religious organizations, civil liberties groups, civil rights organizations, church groups, and hundreds of other groups. The legitimate concerns of these groups have not been properly aired in the Senate. I am aware of the fact that the REAL ID Act, despite what I say, despite my reservations, will become law. It will become law not because it is the right thing to do but because the House majority has abused its privilege to attach this unexamined bill to must-pass legislation. This is highly inappropriate, and I hope that all of the Senate will agree to highlight and correct the deficiencies of these immigration provisions in the year to come.
I yield the floor.

Mr. President, recently, more 1,200 students from across the United States visited Washington, DC to take part in the national finals of We the People: The Citizen and the Constitution, the most extensive educational program in the country developed specifically to educate young people about the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights.
I applaud the class from Maine Township High School in Park Ridge that skillfully represented the great State of Illinois in this prestigious national event. Through their knowledge of the U.S. Constitution, these outstanding students won the statewide competition and made Illinois proud in the national competition here in our Nation's capitol.
Congratulations to Nicole Calabrese, Carly Calkins, Emily Cottrell, Keith Dent, Katie Eichstaedt, Alyssa Engle, Katie Funkhouser, Kathryn Futris, Jacqueline Heffernan, Kevin Kane, Erin Keating, Maddie Kiem, Dan Leung, Mike Mangialardi, Kelly McKenna, Ryan Morrisroe, Allison Mueller, Jessica Newton, James Pikul, Elizabeth Poli, Ashley Rezaeizadeh, Alex Schallmo, Jimmy Skuros, Ryan Stegink, Dan Widing, Meredith Wisniewski, and their teacher Dan States. I commend each and everyone of you for your hard work.
While in Washington, these students participated in a 3-day academic competition that simulated a congressional hearing in which they "testified" before a panel of judges. Students demonstrated their knowledge and understanding of constitutional principles and had opportunities to evaluate, take, and defend positions on relevant historical and contemporary issues.
I wish these students the best of luck in their future endeavors and applaud their outstanding achievement. 

Mr. President, we have all heard from folks back home about the high price of gasoline. When you pull into a gas station to fill up your tank, you're now paying some of the highest prices of all time.
This amendment is designed to do something about that — by promoting a choice at the pump that will allow consumers to choose a fuel that today is 50 cents per gallon cheaper than regular gasoline.
That's why I would like to thank the chairman of the Finance Committee, Senator Grassley, and the ranking member of the Committee, Senator Baucus, for their advocacy of this amendment. I also want to thank the manager of the transportation bill, Chairman Inhofe, for working with us on this proposal. These Senate leaders are all committed to addressing high gas prices, and their work on this amendment is an example of that commitment.
I would like to thank my fellow authors of this amendment, Senator Talent, as well as my distinguished colleague from Illinois, Senator Durbin, for their hard work in getting this provision passed. And I thank the cosponsors of this amendment, also longtime supporters of ethanol, Senators Lugar, Harkin, Bayh, Coleman, Salazar, Dayton, and Nelson of Nebraska.
And of course, I would like to thank the excellent staff work of Elizabeth Paris, Matt Jones, and Russ Sullivan on behalf of this provision.
I am sure many of us in this Chamber, and many watching these proceedings, would jump at the chance to fill our cars and trucks with fuel that is 50 cents cheaper than current prices. What many consumers may not know is that that option is available today. It is known as E-85, a fuel comprised of 85 percent ethanol. And I suspect most Americans would agree that a fuel made of 85 percent Midwestern corn is a lot more desirable than one made from 100 percent Middle Eastern oil.
Right now, there are millions of cars and trucks that can run on E-85. They are known as "flexible fuel vehicles," and the auto industry is turning out hundreds of thousands of them every year. These cars and trucks aren't more expensive to operate than regular cars — in fact, for just a one-hundred-dollar adjustment, even regular cars could run on E-85. And if E-85 is good enough for the Indianapolis 500 — which just announced their cars will run on this fuel — then you can be sure that E-85 will work great in a flexible fuel vehicle.
The only problem now is our short supply of E-85 fuel stations. While there are more than 180,000 gas stations all over America, only about 400 offer E-85.
The amendment adopted by the Senate today addresses this problem by providing a tax credit to encourage the installation of more E-85 fuel pumps at your local gas station. Its enactment will not only give motorists another option at the pump, it will also send a clear message that the U.S. Senate is serious about reducing our country's dangerous dependence on imported oil.
Again, I thank my colleagues who have worked to adopt this amendment to help make America energy independent.

Mr. President, like my distinguished colleagues from Arkansas and from Mississippi, I rise in opposition to the amendment offered by my distinguished colleague from Virginia. I strongly urge my colleagues to preserve the seatbelt program as it is written in the Transportation reauthorization bill.
This provision in the underlying bill gives States that pass primarily seatbelt laws a one-time incentive grant from that State's annual traffic safety grant apportionment. The purpose of this incentive is to encourage States to take specific action, passage of a primary seatbelt law that will save more lives.
As it so happens, my State of Illinois passed a primary seatbelt law in response to this incentive. I know we did it in response to these incentives because I was the chief sponsor of passage of the primary seatbelt law.
The same thing happened in Delaware. The same thing happened in Tennessee. You know what. It works, and it works faster and cheaper than any other method, in terms of ensuring that people wear safety belts and save lives.
It is amazing we have to keep saying this, but seatbelts save lives and primary seatbelt laws save more lives. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration predicts if every State enacted primary seatbelt laws, more than 1,000 lives could be saved each year and 17,000 injuries could be prevented. Seatbelt use is 11 percentage points higher in States with primary enforcement laws than in those States where laws provide for secondary enforcement. And States changing from secondary to primary enforcement have seen 10 to 15 percentage point increases in usage.
Beyond the facts and statistics, this is an issue that makes sense. We should not have to just hope people wear seatbelts, just as we should not have to hope they obey speed limits or hope they stop at red lights. We should do what we can to make sure people will wear seatbelts that will keep them alive. We teach our children to wear seatbelts when they get into a car and we all hope they listen to mom and dad and do it when we are not there, but wouldn't we feel better if we knew our laws in our communities were helping to make that happen? Doesn't it makes sense for the Federal Government to maintain a consistent message on seatbelt use, not through a mandate but through a simple incentive?
The National Safe Kids Campaign thinks so. Mothers Against Drunk Drivers thinks so. They endorse and prefer the Federal incentive as written in the underlying bill.
Finally, a Federal incentive is also a Federal commitment. When the Federal Government makes a commitment and States respond accordingly, then the Federal Government needs to keep its word. One of the points that was raised by Senator Allen in sponsoring this amendment was that, in Virginia at least, there seems to be some concern that primary seatbelt enforcement would result potentially in an increase in racial profiling in Virginia.
As somebody whose community on the south side of Chicago is fairly familiar with racial profiling, and who hears anecdotes each day from African-American drivers who believe they may have been profiled, I am certainly sensitive to Senator Allen's point. As it turns out, though, part of the way we were able to solve this in Illinois was to couple a primary seatbelt enforcement law with a racial profiling law that would ensure we were keeping track as to how traffic enforcement was taking place and to make certain it was being done in a nondiscriminatory fashion.
This was the bargain that was struck at the local level: the notion that we would have a primary seatbelt law enforced; we would also have a data collection bill that would allow us to track and make sure our traffic laws are being applied in a nondiscriminatory fashion.
That deal that was struck in Illinois was premised on the notion that we would be getting these Federal incentives. It is not appropriate for the Federal Government to now pull the rug out from under States such as Illinois that have done the right thing. It is appropriate, instead, for us to keep our word, maintain our commitments, and make sure we continue to incentivize a law that everybody knows, in fact, saves the lives of our citizens.
I encourage my colleagues to oppose this amendment
Mr. President, I yield the floor.

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.

Mr. President, we have been spending a considerable amount of time in this body debating the so-called nuclear option. Today I want to spend a little bit of time talking about an issue that poses a more significant threat to our Republic.
Throughout the last half of the 20th century, one nation more than any other on the face of the Earth, defined and shaped the threats posed to the United States. This nation, of course, was the Soviet Union and its successor state, Russia.
While many have turned their attention to China or other parts of the world, I believe the most important threat to the security of the United States continues to lie within the borders of the former Soviet Union in the form of stockpiles of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons and materials. We are in a race against time to prevent these weapons from getting in the hands of international terrorist organizations or rogue states. The path to this potential disaster is easier than anyone could imagine. There are a number of potential sources of fissile material in the former Soviet Union in sites that are poorly secured. The material is compact, easy to hide, and hard to track. Weapons designs can be easily found on the Internet.
Today, some weapons experts believe that terrorist organizations will have enough fissile material to build a nuclear bomb in the next 10 years — that is right, 10 years.
I rise today to instill a sense of urgency in the Senate. I rise today to ask how are we going to deal with this threat tomorrow, a year from now, a decade from now?
The President has just completed an international trip that included a visit to Russia. I commend him for taking this trip and making our relationship with Russia a priority.
During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union produced nearly 2,000 tons of plutonium and highly enriched uranium for use in weapons that could destroy the world several times over. To give an idea of just how much this is, it takes only 5 to 10 kilograms of plutonium to build a nuclear weapon that could kill the entire population of St. Louis. For decades, strategic deterrence, our alliances, and the balance of power with the Soviet Union ensured the relative safety of these weapons and materials.
With the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, all this has changed. Key institutions within the Soviet national security apparatus have crumbled, exposing dangerous gaps in the security of nuclear weapons, delivery systems, and fissile material.
Regional powers felt fewer constraints to develop nuclear weapons. Rogue states accelerated weapons programs.
And while this was happening, international terrorist organizations who are aggressively seeking nuclear weapons gained strength and momentum.
Now, thanks to the leadership of former Senator Nunn and Senator Lugar in creating the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program at the Department of Defense, there is no question that we have made some great progress in securing these weapons.
These same two leaders continue to work tirelessly on this issue to this day — Senator Nunn, through the Nuclear Threat Initiative, and Senator Lugar, through his chairmanship of the Foreign Relations Committee.
The situation in Russia and the rest of the former Soviet Union is drastically different than it was in 1991 or even 1996 or 2001. But, the threat is still extremely dangerous and extremely real.
In March of this year, a senior Russian commander concluded that 39 of 46 key Russian weapons facilities had serious security shortcomings. Many Russian nuclear research sites frequently have doors propped open, security sensors turned off, and guards patrolling without ammunition in their weapons.
Meanwhile, the security situation outside of Russia continues to be of grave concern. Fanatical terrorist organizations who want these weapons continue to search every corner of the Earth resorting to virtually any means necessary. The nuclear programs of nations such as Iran and North Korea threaten to destabilize key regions of the world. We are still learning about the tremendous damage caused by A.Q. Khan, the rogue Pakistani weapons scientist.
Looking back over the past decade and a half, it is clear that we could and should have done more.
So as the President returns from his trip to Russia, we should be thinking — on a bipartisan basis — about the critical issues that can guide us in the future to ensure that there are no more missed opportunities.
The first question we should be thinking about is what is the future of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program? What is our plan? I believe the administration must spend more time working with Congress to chart out a roadmap and a strategic vision of the program.
There are two things the President can do to move on this issue. First, in the National Security Strategy to Combat Weapons of Mass Destruction of 2002, the administration said the National Security Council would prepare a 5-year governmentwide strategy by March of 2003. To my knowledge, this has not been completed. In addition, Congress required the administration to submit an interagency coordination plan on how to more effectively deal with nonproliferation issues. This plan is due at the end of this month.
Completing these plans will help the United States better address critical day-to-day issues such as liability, resource allocation, and timetables. Having a better strategic vision will also help us work more efficiently and effectively with other international donors who have become increasingly involved and are making significant contributions to these efforts. This is very important, as the contribution of other donors can help us make up valuable lost time.
Mr. President, my second question concerns the U.S.-Russian relationship. Where is this relationship heading? Will Russia be an adversary, a partner, or something in between?
We do not ask these questions simply because we are interested in being nice and want only to get along with the Russians. We have to ask these questions because they directly impact our progress towards securing and destroying stockpiles of nuclear weapons and materials.
In the last few years, we have seen some disturbing trends in Russia: the rapid deterioration of democracy and the rule of law, bizarre and troubling statements from President Putin about the fall of the Soviet Union, the abuses that have taken place in Chechnya, and Russian meddling in the former Soviet Union — from the Baltics to the Ukraine to Georgia.
The Russians must understand that their actions on some of these issues are entirely unacceptable.
At the same time, I believe we have to do a better job of working with the Russians to make sure they are moving in the right direction. This starts by being thoughtful and consistent about what we say and what we do. Tone matters.
Some of the statements by our own officials have been confusing, contradictory, and problematic. At times I have been left scratching my head about what exactly our policy is and how administration statements square with this policy.
Another issue is the level of sustained engagement with Russia. I am glad the President and Secretary of State have made several trips to Russia, but as these trips are only a few days every year or so this is only one aspect of the relationship.
An additional component, which has suffered in recent years, is our foreign assistance programs to Russia and the rest of the former Soviet Union. These programs are absolutely essential in maintaining our engagement with Russia. These programs are not giveaways. They are programs that advance U.S. interests by strengthening Russian democracy and civil society, enhancing economic development and dealing with international health issues — in addition to curbing the nonproliferation threat.
At a time when these programs are desperately needed, their budgets have been cut dramatically. At a time when we should be doing more to engage and shape the future of Russia, we seem to be doing the exact opposite.
The nonproliferation threat does not exist in a vacuum. The issue I just mentioned, along with other important issues such as our own strategic nuclear arsenal, must be considered as we move forward.
Finally, Mr. President, I would like my colleagues to consider how our relationship with Russia, and our efforts to secure and destroy weapons and materials inside the former Soviet Union, fits in with our broader nonproliferation goals.
Russia is a major player in the two biggest proliferation challenges we currently face — Iran and North Korea. Russia's dangerous involvement with Iran's nuclear program has been well documented, and there is no question their actions will be pivotal if the President is to successfully resolve this deteriorating situation.
The Russians are also an important voice in trying to make progress on the deteriorating situation in North Korea. The Russian city of Vladivostok is home to 590,000 people and is very close to the North Korean border, putting the Russians smack in the middle of the crisis that we need to resolve.
In addition to all this, Russia holds a seat on the Security Council of the United Nations, which could consider Iranian and North Korean issues in the very near future.
Developing bilateral and multilateral strategies that deal with Russia's role in these growing crises will be extremely important, both in terms of resolving these crises, advancing our non-proliferation goals within the former Soviet Union, and our long-term relationship with Russia.
I realize that, at this time, none of us have all the answers to these extraordinarily difficult questions. But if we hope to successfully fight terror and avoid disaster before it arrives at our shores, we have to start finding these answers. We have a lot of work to do.
I believe it is worth putting in place a process, one that involves senior administration officials, a bipartisan group of Members of Congress, as well as retired senior military officers and diplomats, in an effort to dramatically improve progress on these issues.
I am interested in hearing from the President about his trip. I am also interested in hearing if he believes that an idea similar to the one I put forward is worth considering.
Delay is not an option. We need to start making more progress on this issue today. I urge my colleagues to act.
Despite all the distractions we have had with the so-called nuclear option and judicial nominations, this is literally a matter of life and death. I hope we start paying more attention to it in this Senate Chamber and in the debates that are going to be coming in the coming months.
Mr. President, I yield the floor.

Mr. President, I rise today to bring attention to the situation of Afro-Latinos throughout Latin America, in the hopes that we can encourage more action on this issue. From Colombia to Brazil to the Dominican Republic to Ecuador, persons of African descent continue to experience racial discrimination and remain among the poorest and most marginalized groups in the entire region. While recent positive steps have been taken in some areas — for example, giving land titles to Afro-Colombians and passing explicit anti-discrimination legislation in Brazil — much work still needs to be done to ensure that this is the beginning of an ongoing process of reform, not the end.
In places where civil conflict has taken hold, Afro-Latinos are much more likely to become victims of violence or refugees in their own countries. In many areas, Afro-Latinos are also subject to aggression by local police forces at far greater rates than those perceived to be white. Access to health services is another serious concern, and recent studies have shown that Afro-Latino communities are at greater risk of contracting HIV/AIDS.
In the last Congress, there was not one mention in the Senate of the millions of Afro-Latinos who continue to experience this widespread discrimination and socioeconomic marginalization. Now is the time for more action on this issue, not less. Emerging civil society groups are growing stronger throughout many countries in Latin America, and this growth should be encouraged as it presents important opportunities for partnerships and collaboration. I look forward to working with my colleagues in the Senate and House on this critical concern in the coming months, and I believe that together we can and will make a difference.

Mr. President, let me begin my statement today by outlining what I think this debate is not about.
I do not believe this debate is about Mr. Bolton being rude on occasion. This debate is not about Mr. Bolton being blunt. The debate is not about Mr. Bolton occasionally losing his temper.
As the distinguished Senator from Arizona just noted, if this is the criteria, many of us in the U.S. Senate would not be qualified to serve in a position that requires confirmation. Almost all of us lose our cool from time to time and say things we come to regret later. Let me add, I don't think this debate is about whether Mr. Bolton is an intelligent man.
These are not the issues at the heart of the strong bipartisan objections that have been voiced on this nomination.
The crux of the objections is very specific, very credible allegations that Mr. Bolton sought to shade intelligence and sideline career intelligence analysts who did not agree with his policy views. This is the core of the bipartisan objections to this nomination.
Over and over again, we heard from a range of career officials and Bush administration appointees that Mr. Bolton sought to massage intelligence to fit an ideological bias. Let me emphasize, these are objections coming forward from Bush appointees.
In addition, we have 102 former ambassadors and senior diplomats who oppose Bolton — from the Nixon administration, the Ford administration, and that bastion of fuzzy-headed liberalism, the Reagan administration.
In an environment where reliable intelligence is one of the best tools we have to keep us safe, we must heed the lessons from the Iraq war: Intelligence must never be shaped to fit policy views. Dissent within the intelligence community should not be muzzled or suppressed; it should be respected and encouraged.
The United States Senate should be sending a clear, unequivocal statement to our intelligence officers: We want you to play it straight and call it like you see it — even if it is something we do not want to hear.
I am afraid that by voting to confirm Mr. Bolton, we will fail to send that critical message.
Now, I believe the President is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when appointing senior members of his team. To that end, I have supported a number of the President's choices for top foreign policy positions, including Secretary Rice; Robert Zoellick, to be her deputy; and Nick Burns, to fill the third-ranking position at the State Department.
I think we should provide some deference to the President. The executive branch is primarily responsible for the day-to-day operations of our foreign policy.
At the same time, the Constitution gives the Senate the power to advise and to consent. This is a responsibility I take very seriously.
And so, because of Mr. Bolton's consistent breach of the line between practicing politics and analyzing intelligence — that is pivotal to our national security — I intend to vote "no" on the nomination of John Bolton to be our representative to the United Nations.
I agree with much of what my colleagues have said about the problems with Mr. Bolton's qualifications to serve in this position. But I would like to focus on one issue that I believe has not been covered in great detail — Mr. Bolton's performance in his current job.
It has been suggested we should overlook the troubling aspects of Mr. Bolton's record — the fact that he appears to have attempted to manipulate intelligence data; the fact he does not appear to have been entirely forthcoming before the Foreign Relations Committee; and the fact we still cannot get basic information from the State Department on his nomination — for one reason: because Mr. Bolton is so competent for the job. I have heard this argument repeatedly from the other side of the aisle.
I am baffled by this reasoning. I am stupefied by the suggestion that Mr. Bolton is such an excellent choice for the job, so uniquely qualified for this job, that we should just ignore all of these other problems.
When I look at the record of Mr. Bolton during the last 4 years as the top arms control and nonproliferation official at the State Department, I am not impressed. Let's look at his track record.
On North Korea, the approach that has been advocated by both Mr. Bolton and this administration has simply not worked. Under Mr. Bolton's watch, there are no longer international inspectors and cameras at any site in North Korea. The North Koreans have withdrawn from the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We now believe North Korea has developed material for six to eight nuclear weapons.
When North Korea has one or two nuclear weapons, the situation is critical. They can test one weapon, and hold one weapon. When it has six to eight, the situation is terminal. North Korea can now test a weapon, hold a couple, and sell the rest. And we know that North Korea will do virtually anything for the money.
Another area Mr. Bolton was responsible for is the Non-Proliferation Treaty, a critical tool for helping to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to rogue states, which could ultimately fall into the hands of terrorist organizations.
President Bush recognized the importance of the NPT and pledged to strengthen this treaty in a 2004 speech at the National Defense University. A week later, Mr. Bolton promised to do the same.
What has happened since? Virtually nothing. The administration has made very little progress on this issue, and the Non-Proliferation Treaty review conference currently underway is not going well.
An article from MSNBC reports:
The United States has been losing control of the conference's agenda this week to Iran and other countries, a potentially serious setback to U.S. efforts to isolate Tehran.
Where has Mr. Bolton been throughout this process?
According to the same article:
[S]ince last fall Bolton, Mr. Bush's embattled nominee to be America's ambassador to the United Nations, has aggressively lobbied for a senior job in the second Bush administration. During that time Mr. Bolton did almost no diplomatic groundwork for the NPT conference . . . officials say. Everyone knew the conference was coming, and that it would be contentious, says a former senior Bush official, but Bolton stopped all diplomacy on this six months ago.
In other words, Mr. Bolton was more interested in lobbying for the U.N. job than doing the tough groundwork necessary for a successful review conference.
Let's turn to Iran — another issue on which Mr. Bolton should have been working to formulate a coherent, workable administration strategy. Instead, the administration's policy has been all over the map. In a hearing before the Foreign Relations Committee last week, a senior State Department official described the latest iteration of the Administration's policy as a "patient policy."
I would say the policy has been less about patience and more about paralysis — a dangerous situation for a nation such as Iran that is developing nuclear weapons, is a state sponsor of terrorism, and is meddling in Iraq.
Perhaps this paralysis and incoherence is best illustrated by the fact that since 2001, the administration has tried — to my knowledge, without success — to formulate a Presidential Directive on Iran. As the top non-proliferation official at the State Department, Mr. Bolton should have been doing more to shape a workable policy instead of letting it drift dangerously along for the last 4 years.
Mr. President, I know my time is running short, so let me conclude with a couple of simple points.
Two examples are frequently cited by Mr. Bolton and his supporters as evidence of his success and competence in his current position: Libya and the Proliferation Security Initiative. During his confirmation hearings, Mr. Bolton touted these successes over and over again.
Now, I agree with Mr. Bolton that we have made important progress on these issues. But reports suggest that the Libya deal was struck in spite of Mr. Bolton, not because of him. In fact, Mr. Bolton was sidelined from the negotiations by the White House. And, the British Government specifically asked that Mr. Bolton not play a role in this process.
I quote from an MSNBC article that specifically addresses this issue:
Bolton, for instance, often takes and is given credit for the administration's Proliferation Security Initiative, an agreement to interdict suspected WMD shipments on the high seas, and the deal to dismantle Libya's nuclear program, a deal that Bolton, by the way, had sought to block. But [a] former senior Bush official . . . says that, in fact, Bolton's successor, Robert Joseph deserves most of the credit for these achievements. This official adds that it was Joseph who was in charge of counterproliferation at the NSC [and] who had to pitch in when Bolton fumbled preparations for the NPT conference as well.
Now, here is my point: If there was clear evidence that Mr. Bolton is a terrific diplomat, maybe I could understand how some in the Senate could overlook what I consider to be a mountain of evidence concerning his misuse of intelligence and say: You know what, this guy is such a capable administrator and diplomat, we need him to reform the United Nations.
I would still believe that the misuse of intelligence, in and of itself, disqualifies Mr. Bolton from the job, but at least I could understand why some people would draw such a conclusion.
But the record indicates that in his current job he has not had much success, which leads me to ask: Why is it we are so confident this is the person who is going to lead reform in the United Nations?
The distinguished Senator from Arizona is exactly right, we need reform in the United Nations. It is inexcusable some of the things that go on up there.
But as a consequence of Mr. Bolton's diminished credibility and stature, I think he is exactly the opposite of what we need at the United Nations. Countries such as Zimbabwe and Burma, and others that do not want to see reform take place at the UN, are going to be able to dismiss our efforts at reform by saying: Mr. Bolton is a U.N. basher, someone who is ideologically opposed to the existence of the U.N.--thereby using Mr. Bolton's own words and lack of credibility as a shield to prevent the very reforms that need to take place.
Moreover, I have yet to hear a comprehensive plan from Mr. Bolton or the administration for U.N. reform.
So let me close by saying this: When the Foreign Relations Committee considered Mr. Bolton's nomination, I invoked the memory of Adlai Stevenson, a great citizen of the State of Illinois. Stevenson had the credibility, the temperament, and the diplomatic skill to guide the United States through some of the worst, most difficult times at the United Nations — especially the Cuban missile crisis.
During this crisis, we were able to isolate the Soviets because of the stature and integrity of our permanent representative to the United Nations.
Given the issues that have surfaced surrounding Mr. Bolton's nomination, I simply ask my colleagues this: If a crisis were to occur with North Korea or Iran, are we sure the integrity and credibility of Mr. Bolton would command the respect of the rest of the world? Would Mr. Bolton, like Adlai Stevenson, be able to convince the world that our intelligence and our policies are right and true? Would Mr. Bolton be able to isolate our enemies and build a coalition that would ultimately make our troops safer and our mission easier?
I believe the answer is no. There are some wonderful, capable, tough, conservative, reform-minded Republican diplomats who are well qualified for this task and would easily be confirmed by the Senate. Mr. Bolton is not one of them.
I would urge that the other side of the aisle seriously consider their position on this nomination. I hope we can muster the votes to send this nomination back to the President. Let's start afresh. I know we can do better.
Thank you, Mr. President.

Mr. President, I am pleased to join my colleagues Senators Specter and Harkin to introduce The Gynecological Cancer Education and Awareness Act of 2005, also known as Johanna's Law. This important legislation authorizes a national gynecologic cancer early detection and awareness campaign for women and their providers. This bill is named in honor of Johanna Silver Gordon who died from ovarian cancer and whose sister, Sheryl Silver, founded Johanna's Law Alliance for Women's Cancer Awareness. We thank Ms. Silver for her courage and her persistent efforts to turn her sister's tragedy into a crusade to raise awareness and prevent needless suffering and death from gynecologic cancers for other women.
Nearly 80,000 American women are diagnosed with gynecologic cancers each year. Tragically, 29,000 of them die from this disease. We know that early detection is the key to successful treatment of all gynecologic cancers, and we have made great strides at reducing rates of cervical cancer with wide-spread use of Pap screening tests. Yet, we have not been able to replicate this success with uterine cancer and ovarian cancer, for which effective and general screening methods do not exist. For ovarian cancer, which is the deadliest of the gynecologic cancers, in addition to lack of screening tests, doctors and researchers have not identified effective diagnostic and treatments. Seventy percent of all new diagnoses of ovarian cancer take place after this cancer has progressed beyond its earliest and most survivable stage.
Given these challenges, knowing the symptoms of gynecologic cancers, which can mimic GI illnesses, menopause or perimenopause, is key to early diagnosis. The 5-year survival rates for the most common gynecologic cancers are 90 percent when diagnosed early, but drop to 50 percent for cancers diagnosed later.
Johanna's Law will promote early detection and awareness through a National Public Awareness Campaign conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services. Women will be given written materials that provide information about gynecologic cancers, and Public Service Announcements will be developed to encourage women to talk to their doctors about gynecologic cancer. The Department will also give grants for demonstration projects to local and national non-profit organizations to identify the best ways to reach and educate women about these cancers, particularly those women who are high risk.
Johanna's Law will make sure that women and doctors get the information they need to help them recognize early symptoms of gynecologic cancers, so that women can be diagnosed and treated earlier when their cancers are treatable. I urge my colleagues to work to move this legislation forward promptly.

Mr. President, the Department of Veterans Affairs estimates that on any given day, as many as 200,000 veterans are homeless. That is 200,000 men and women who have fought for this country who will go without the comfort of knowing that they will have a roof over their head and a place to call home.
If 200,000 of our Nation's veterans will go homeless tonight, the VA estimates that about twice as many veterans will experience homelessness this year. Again, that is 400,000 men and women who defended this great Nation, who will be left out on the streets at some point this year.
I hope my colleagues are as distressed as I am by these numbers, and I hope my colleagues will join me in supporting the bill I introduce today — the Shelter All Veterans Everywhere or "SAVE" Reauthorization Act of 2005.
This bill reauthorizes many of the soon-to-expire homeless veterans programs currently serving this needy population, including the Homeless Providers Grant and Per Diem Program and the Homeless Veterans Reintegration Program. These programs work to provide much-needed services to homeless veterans so that they can find jobs and ultimately find a stable home. These programs deserve to be continued. The SAVE Reauthorization Act actually expands the reach of the Homeless Veterans Reintegration Program, which provides job placement and training assistance, to include those veterans at risk of homelessness as well as those actually homeless, so that we can work to prevent homelessness before it happens.
 Mr. CORNYN (for himself, Mr. Leahy, Mr. Feingold, and Mr. Alexander):
S. 1181. A bill to ensure an open and deliberate process in Congress by providing that any future legislation to establish a new exemption to section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Freedom of Information Act) be stated explicitly within the text of the bill; to the Committee on the Judiciary.

Mr. President, today marks the 40th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Griswold v. Connecticut, which struck down Connecticut laws that prohibited reproductive counseling and the use of contraception. In recognizing a constitutional right to privacy, this landmark decision secured the right of married women to use contraception and laid the groundwork for widespread access to birth control for all American women.
The availability and use of contraceptives has had a profound impact on the health and lives of women across the Nation. Widespread use of birth control has led to dramatic reductions in national rates of sexually transmitted infections, unintended pregnancies, and abortion. Contraceptive use has also significantly improved maternal and infant health outcomes, and reduced maternal and infant mortality rates. Since 1965 maternal and infant mortality rates have declined by more than two-thirds.
The impact of contraception on the professional lives of women has been equally profound. The ability of women to control fertility has allowed them to successfully achieve educational and career goals that would've been impossible a century ago. Women are critical to this nation's economic success, comprising up to one half of the total U.S. labor force.
In 1999, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recognized the significant impact of birth control on American society and included family planning in their list of the "Ten Great Public Health Achievements in the 20th Century." However, despite considerable progress in this area, much work remains. The United States has one of the highest rates of unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections among industrialized nations, which in part reflects lack of access to basic preventive health care, including contraception.
A growing number of women — almost 17 million currently — must rely on publicly supported contraceptive care. Between 2000 and 2002, this number increased by 400,000 alone, because of the rising number of uninsured women. Yet, even those women with health insurance are not guaranteed access to contraceptives because some health plans choose not to cover these medications and procedures as they would other basic preventive health measures. And we are increasingly hearing about pharmacists and other providers who refuse to prescribe or fill contraceptive prescriptions, or refer women to those who will, because of their own personal beliefs.
This 40th anniversary of the Griswold decision provides a perfect opportunity to reflect upon the critical importance and impact of this decision on the health and professional lives of millions of women. We must ensure that policy decisions about contraception services remain health decisions and not political ones, and work to ensure that all women have access to contraception when they need it.

Mr. President, I rise in strong support of this resolution. Before I make any further remarks, I would like to recognize Doria D. Johnson, and thank her for coming. She is from Evanston, IL. Ms. Johnson is the great, great-granddaughter of Anthony Crawford, a South Carolina farmer who was lynched nearly 100 years ago for the crime of being a successful Black farmer. I am sure that this day has special meaning for her, and for the other family members of those who were impacted by these great tragedies of the past. I thank her and others for being here today.
Since America's darkest days of Jim Crow, separate but equal, fire hoses, church bombings, cross burnings and lynchings, the people of this great Nation have found the courage, on occasion, to speak up and speak out so that we can right this country's wrongs, and walk together down that long road of transformation that continues to perfect our Union. It is a transformation that brought us the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act; a transformation that led to the first Black Member of Congress, and the first Black and White children holding hands in the same playground and the same school; a transformation without which I would not be standing here speaking today. But I am. And I am proud because, thanks to this resolution, we are taking another step in acknowledging a dark corner of our history. We are taking a step that allows us — after looking at the 4,700 deaths from lynchings, the hate that was behind those deaths, and this Chamber's refusal to try and stop them — to finally say that we were wrong.
There is a power in acknowledging error and mistake. It is a power that potentially transforms not only those who were impacted directly by the lynchings, but also those who are the progeny of the perpetrators of these crimes. There is a piercing photographic exhibit in Chicago right now that displays some of the lynchings that occurred across the country over the past two centuries. These photographs show that what is often most powerful is not the gruesome aspects of the lynching itself, nor the terrible rending of the body that took place. No, what is most horrific, what is most disturbing to the soul is the photographs in which you see young little White girls or young little White boys with their parents on an outing, looking at the degradation of another human being. One wonders not only what the lynching did to the family member of those who were lynched, but also what the effect was on the sensibilities of those young people who stood there, watching.
Now that we are finally acknowledging this injustice, we have an opportunity to reflect on the cruelties that inhabit all of us. We can now take the time to teach our children to treat people who look different than us with the same respect that we would expect for ourselves. So it is fitting, it is proper, and it is right that we are doing what we are doing today.
However, I do hope, as we commemorate this past injustice, that this Chamber also spends some time doing something concrete and tangible to heal the long shadow of slavery and the legacy of racial discrimination, so that 100 years from now we can look back and be proud, and not have to apologize once again. That means completing the unfinished work of the civil rights movement, and closing the gap that still exists in health care, education, and income. There are more ways to perpetrate violence than simply a lynching. There is the violence that we subject young children to when they do not have any opportunity or hope, when they stand on street corners not thinking much of themselves, not thinking that their lives are worth living. That is a form of violence that this Chamber could do something about.
As we are spending time apologizing today for these past failures of the Senate to act, we should also spend some time debating the extension of the Voting Rights Act and the best way to extend health care coverage to over 45 million uninsured Americans. We should be considering how we can make certain that college is affordable for young African-American children, the great, great-grandchildren or the great, great, great-grandchildren of those who have been wronged. These are the ways we can finally ensure that the blessings of opportunity reach every single American, and finally claim a victory in the long struggle for civil rights.
Today is a step in the right direction. Today's actions give us an opportunity to heal and to move forward. But for those who still harbor anger in their hearts, who still wonder how to move on from such terrible violence, it is worth reflecting for a moment on one remarkable individual: Mamie Till Mobley.
Mamie Till Mobley's child Emmett was only 14 years old when they found him in the Mississippi River, beaten and bloodied beyond recognition. After Ms. Mobley saw her child, her baby, unrecognizable, his face so badly beaten it barely looked human, someone suggested that she should have a closed casket at his funeral. She said: No, we are going to have an open casket, and everybody is going to witness what they did to my child.
The courage displayed by this mother galvanized the civil rights movement in the North and in the South. And, despite the immensity of the pain she felt, Mamie Till Mobley has repeatedly said: I never wasted a day hating. Imagine that. She never wasted a day hating, not one day.
I rise today, thanking God that the United States Congress — the representatives of the American people and our highest ideals — will not waste one more day without issuing the apology that will continue to help us march down the path of transformation that Mamie Till Mobley has been on her whole life, and that the people in attendance in the gallery have been on for generations.
I am grateful for this tribute, and I am looking forward to joining hands with my colleagues and the American people to make sure that when our children and grandchildren look back at our actions in this Chamber, we do not have something to apologize for.
I yield the floor.

Mr. President, on May 22, 2005, the women's lacrosse team from Northwestern University captured the NCAA Division I championship. This was the first championship for the Wildcats' women's lacrosse team and the first women's lacrosse champion to come from outside of the eastern time zone.
This championship also marks a milestone for Northwestern sports. It is the first ever women's team championship for the university and only the second team championship in school history. The men's fencing team was national champion in 1941.
This talented and dedicated team from the great State of Illinois secured the championship by defeating traditional lacrosse powerhouses, Dartmouth and Princeton. The Wildcats completed their undefeated, 21 win season with a 13-10 victory over defending champion Virginia. Since regaining varsity status in 2002, this outstanding program has taken only four seasons to capture the championship.
Congratulations to Abby Bangser, Donna McCann, Sarah Albrecht, Kristen Kjellman, Sara Crosby, Aly Josephs, Kristen Boege, Ashley Koester, Courtney Koester, Hilary Alley, Ashley Gersuk, Courtney Flynn, Christy Finch, Lindsey Munday, Emily Lovett, Laura Glassanos, Shelby Chlopak, Kaitie Lenahan, Lynda McCandlish, Abby Alley, Sarah Walsh, Lindsay Finocchiaro, Jenny Bush, Fallon McGraw, Quinn Cammarota, Lindsay North, Meredith Philipp, Hannah Whitman, Rebecca Zazove, Annie Elliott, Bailey Su, Kate Darmody, Minnie Doherty, Kim Corcoran, Head Coach Kelly Amonte Hiller, Assistant Coach Alexis Venechanos, Assistant Coach Danielle Shearer, and Assistant Coach Scott Hiller.
Please join me in congratulating the Northwestern women's lacrosse team on its historic championship season. 

I agree with the senior Senator from Vermont about the importance of upholding the rule of law in Africa and around the world. I would also like to add my support for the efforts of the Special Court for Sierra Leone to bring to justice some of the worst war criminals of the 20th century. While the Special Court has not been perfect, there is no question that the Court is doing vitally important work of promoting peace and reconciliation, increasing accountability, and strengthening the rule of law throughout West Africa. I also want to discuss a related issue — the case of Charles Taylor. I know the Senator from Vermont has been working for years on this issue.
I will simply say that Charles Taylor is an indicted war criminal, and he needs to be transferred to the Special Court to stand trial as soon as possible. The Government of Nigeria has allowed Charles Taylor to live in exile, within its borders, with the support of the international community, including the United States, since August 2003. While we owe Nigeria a debt of gratitude for helping prevent further bloodshed in Liberia, it is time for Mr. Taylor to be transferred to the Special Court.
No nation should be permitted to willfully ignore an indictment issued by this tribunal. Moreover, there are credible reports that Mr. Taylor has broken the terms of his exile, is a threat to the Liberian peace process, and continues to meddle in the internal affairs of Liberia — just a few months before the Liberian elections.
I wonder if the Senator from Vermont shares my views?

I thank the Senator from Vermont, the ranking member of the Appropriations Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, because he makes a crucial point. Debt relief from the United States is not automatic. In the past, debt relief has come with conditions, including making progress in fighting corruption and on economic reform, to ensure that this relief achieves the maximum results.
For Nigeria, this means turning over Charles Taylor — an indicted war criminal who has the blood of thousands on his hands and threatens, once again, to destabilize the region — to the Special Court. Like the Senator from Vermont, I strongly believe that Nigeria is a worthy candidate for debt relief and a key U.S. partner in West Africa. When Charles Taylor is turned over, there is no doubt in my mind that I will be a forceful advocate for debt relief for Nigeria. I would also like to praise the Government of Nigeria for its leadership on other issues, especially their efforts to lead the African Union force in Darfur. I want nothing more than to see the Taylor issue successfully resolved so we can focus our attention on other important issues with the Nigerians.
I would also reiterate what the Senator said about the waiver authority contained in section 585. The President can waive these restrictions, including those pertaining to Nigerian debt relief, by formulating a plan to get Mr. Taylor to the Court.

Mr. President, I support the amendment offered by the Senator from New Mexico, Mr. Bingaman. This amendment is a breath of fresh air in a bill that is filled with many stale concepts regarding our approach to this Nation's energy policy. I am proud to be a cosponsor of this amendment.
Producing a significant amount of our electricity from renewable sources is not a concept for the future. It is a real possibility that exists today using solar, wind, tidal, gas from landfills, and biomass. In fact, 19 States around the country are using these renewable source of energy to steer their States towards a future of clean, sustainable energy use.
In my State of Illinois and in many other States, enacting this standard is a no-brainer. This winter, Illinois Governor Blagojevich announced a plan to adopt a renewable portfolio standard requiring Illinois electric utilities to provide 8 percent renewable energy as part of their overall power mix by 2012. This bold vision will make Illinois the second biggest wind power State in the country by 2012. The city of Chicago also has a strong commitment to using renewable sources of energy and is already planning to surpass a 10 percent contribution from renewables in its electricity stream and achieve a 20 percent goal.
In the 18 other States where renewable portfolio standards have been successfully adopted, innovations in electricity generation have flourished at virtually no cost to the consumer. Just imagine what would happen to this industry of the future if we enacted a Federal standard. And, here is the best news: According to the Union of Concerned Scientists, a 10 percent renewable portfolio standard on the Federal level would not add a single penny to consumers' bills.
Introducing renewable electricity into the mix of electricity generation also brings us a measure of physical security. By creating geographically dispersed sources of energy generation, we are providing ourselves with greater electricity security by providing smaller targets and reducing the transport of combustible materials. This is smart policy at a time when we must be vigilant about homeland security.
Our country's demand for electricity is expected to continue growing for decades to come. Enacting a renewable portfolio standard ensures that clean technologies will help us meet that enlarged demand, while not offsetting the importance of investing in clean technologies in other energy production methods, especially coal. Coal will undoubtedly play a large role in our energy portfolio for years to come, and I look forward to a vigorous debate on how we can best assist the utility industry in employing clean coal technologies.
Abraham Lincoln once said: "I am a firm believer in the people. If given the truth, they can be depended upon to meet any national crises. The great point is to bring them the real facts." The real facts are that without forward-thinking amendments such as this one, the energy bill is not going to bring us independence from the 20th century mindset of energy production. Let us give the American public this tool so they too can rise to meet this national energy crisis before it gets worse.

Mr. President, I rise today in support of the amendment offered by the Senator from Washington, Ms. Cantwell. I am proud to be submitting this amendment.
Forty-four years ago, John F. Kennedy challenged America to put a man on the moon by the end of the 1960s. A bipartisan coalition in Congress joined with Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon to make this goal a reality.
Today, we are considering a similarly bold challenge to the Nation — to reduce America's dependence on foreign oil by 40 percent by the year 2025. This challenge is no less important, no less laudable, and no less worthy of bipartisan support, Presidential leadership, and national commitment.
The bill before us purports to offer a comprehensive energy solution for the future. But, as currently drafted, the bill does nothing more than lead us down the same dangerous and unsustainable path that we have been traveling for the last several decades. Unless we draw the line now, outlining a bold change in course, with time enough to prepare, we will see the United States in 2025 even more tethered to foreign oil, and even more subject to economic shocks, than the United States of 2005. Unless we reverse course, we will continue putting our economic well-being and national security at the mercy of unstable foreign governments.
Some will argue that the goals in this amendment are unrealistic and unattainable. I do not agree with these naysayers. When President Kennedy announced his challenge in 1961, he said the following: "This decision demands a major national commitment of scientific and technical manpower, materiel and facilities, and the possibility of their diversion from other important activities where they are already thinly spread. It means a degree of dedication, organization and discipline which have not always characterized our research and development efforts."
Likewise, meeting the requirements of the Senator's amendment will require a similar commitment. But I believe the task before us is much simpler than the one that faced President Kennedy, because we already know how to decrease our reliance on foreign oil. A smart energy policy that focuses on a greater commitment to technology; including hybrid and hydrogen fuel cell technology, renewable fuels, and greater efficiency can take us a long way, if not the entire way, to the goal proposed by the Senator from Washington.
As difficult as it may be, we must try to meet the goal set forth in this amendment. We would be far worse off as a country if we just threw up our hands and admitted defeat.
The people I meet on my travels around Illinois are ready for the challenge. They are tired of giving their hard-earned dollars to foreign governments in the form of record-high gasoline prices. They are tired of seeing their foreign policy being influenced by America's insatiable need for Middle East oil. They are looking to their leaders in Washington for innovative leadership. If we lay down the challenge in this amendment, I have every reason to believe that the American people will rise up to meet it — much like they met a similar challenge 40 years ago.
In 1962, President Kennedy traveled to Rice University to speak about the challenge that he had laid down the year before. He stated: "Surely the opening vistas of space promise high costs and hardships as well as high reward. So it is not surprising that some would have us stay where we are a little longer, to rest, to wait. But this city of Houston, this State of Texas, this country of the U.S. was not built by those who waited and rested and wished to look behind them."
When it comes to our energy policy, we are long past the point of waiting and resting and looking behind us. I urge my colleagues to support the amendment offered by the Senator from Washington.

Madam. President, I was pleased to join the Senator from Michigan, Senator Levin, in submitting a resolution on the Juneteenth Independence Day.
I have heard people ask, "Why celebrate Juneteenth?" We have so many holidays and remembrances already — why add more history to the calendar?
But of course, Juneteenth is not just about celebrating history. It is about learning from it. Just like the day when the greatest civil rights leader of our time was born or the day when we finally gave African Americans a ballot and a voice, Juneteenth is a day when we can look back on a time when everyday Americans faced the most daunting challenges and the slimmest odds and still persevered. When they said "we shall overcome," and they did. When the hopes held by so many for so long finally led to the victory of freedom over servitude; of independence over enslavement.
Juneteenth is a day that allows us to remember that America is still the place where anything is possible. It has been that place in the past, and it can be that place in the future when it comes to the challenges we have yet to meet.
And so when we think of those challenges — when we think of the injustice we still face and the miles we have left to march — when we think of the millions without health care, the children without good schools, the families without jobs, and the disparities that still exist between black and white, rich and poor, educated and uneducated — when we think about all these challenges, we can also think "Juneteenth."
We can think of a day when the word began to spread from town to plantation to city to farm that after more than a hundred years of slavery, millions were now free. That after so many hopeless days and years of despair, the impossible was now truth; the shackles were now broken and a new day was finally here.
In the memory of this day, I believe we can find hope for all the trying days we have yet to face as a people and as a nation. And as we continue to overcome, we will continue to celebrate those victories as historical markers that give future generations the same hope we have today.
I commend Senator Levin for his longtime leadership on civil rights issues and urge my colleagues to support this resolution.

Mr. President, I am proud to join Senators Frist and Clinton in introducing the Health Technology to Enhance Quality Act of 2005.
Our national health care system is in crisis. Forty-five million Americans are uninsured, and this number continues to rise. Health care costs are increasing at almost double digit rates. Millions of Americans are suffering, and dying, from diseases such as diabetes or AIDS that could have been prevented or delayed for many years. And the chance of Americans receiving the right care, at the right time and for the right reason is no greater than the flip of a coin.
These health care issues are varied and complex, as are the solutions. But, as one of my constituents advised, it is time for us in the Congress to put on our hard hats, pick up our tool belts and get to work fixing our broken health care system.
One place to start is by bringing the health care system into the 21st century. In our lifetimes, we have seen some of the greatest advances in the history of technology and the sharing of information. Yet, in our health care system, too much care is still provided with a pen and paper. Too much information about patients is not shared between doctors or readily available to them in the first place. And providers too often do not have the information to know what care has worked most effectively and efficiently to make patients healthy.
Mistakes are easily made — medical errors alone kill up to 98,000 people a year, more people than the number who die from AIDS each year.
But embracing 21st century technology is not just about reducing errors and improving the quality of medical care. It is also about cost.
We spend nearly $1.5 trillion a year on health care in America. But a quarter of that money — one out of every four dollars — is spent on non-medical costs — most of it on bills and paperwork. Every transaction you make at a bank now costs them less than a penny. Yet, because we have not updated technology in the rest of the health care industry, a single transaction still costs up to $25 — not one dime of which goes toward improving the quality of our health care.
The Health Technology to Enhance Quality Act of 2005 is going to help bring the health care system into the 21st century. This bill will lead to the development and implementation of health information technology standards to ensure interoperability of health information systems. The legislation codifies the Office of National Coordinator for Information Technology and establishes standards for the electronic exchange of health information. The bill also provides grant funding to support development of health information technology infrastructure as well as measurement of the quality of care provided to patients.
This legislation will help our health care system take a huge step forward. A vote for the Health TEQ Act is a vote for health care that is safe, effective, and affordable. I urge my colleagues to join us in passing this bill quickly.

Mr. President, I thank Senator Inhofe, Senator Reid, and Senator Domenici for allowing me this time.
I know Dick Durbin. I serve with him in Illinois. We have traveled together through the byways and highways of our great State. I have rarely met someone with greater dedication to ordinary Americans, a stronger belief in the greatness of this Nation, or a more longstanding commitment to public service as an expression of that patriotism than Dick Durbin.
This recent episode obviously has pained him a great deal because although I am new in the Senate, one of the things I am discovering is that we have a tendency, perhaps because we don't share as much time on the floor as we should, perhaps because our politics seem to be ginned up by interest groups and blogs and the Internet, we have a tendency to demonize and jump on and make mockery of each other across the aisle. That is particularly pronounced when we make mistakes. Each and every one of us is going to make a mistake once in a while. We are going to say something unartful; we are going to say something that doesn't appropriately describe our intentions. And what we hope is that our track record of service, the scope of how we have operated and interacted with people, will override whatever particular mistake we make.
Senator Durbin has established himself as one of the people in this Chamber who cares deeply about our veterans and our troops. He hasn't just talked the talk, he has walked the walk. I have been distressed to see my partner from Illinois placed in the situation in which he has been placed. I am grateful he had the courage to stand up and acknowledge that he should have said what he said somewhat differently. But I am also grateful that people, such as the distinguished Senator from Arizona and others, recognize this for what it was — a simple misstatement — and that now we can move on to talk about the substance of the issues that are of legitimate concern to this body, including making certain that when we operate institutions such as those at Guantanamo, we hold the United States to that high standard that all of us expect.
I yield the floor.

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that Pat Haman on my staff, detailed from EPA, be granted floor privileges for the duration of the debate on this amendment.

Mr. President, during the 2 weeks or so that we have been debating this Energy bill in the Senate, the price of crude oil has climbed to a record high of $60 a barrel. Gas is now up to $2.24 per gallon. The Saudis are pumping at near-full capacity, and their own oil minister says that the price of crude will probably stay at this level for the rest of the year.
At this price, the United States is sending $650 million overseas every single day. That is $237 billion a year — much of it to the Middle East, a region we have seen torn by war and terror. It doesn't matter if these countries are budding democracies, despotic regimes with nuclear intentions, or havens for the madrasas that plant the seeds of terror in young minds, they get our money because we need their oil.
As demand continues to skyrocket around the world, other countries have started to realize that guzzling oil is not a sustainable future. What's more, these countries have realized that by investing early in the energy-efficient technology that exists today, they can create millions of tomorrow's jobs and build their economies to rival ours.
China now has a higher fuel economy standard than we do, and it has got 200,000 hybrids on its roads. Japan's Toyota is doubling production of the popular Prius in order to sell 100,000 in the U.S. next year, and it is getting ready to open a brand new plant in China. Meanwhile, we are importing hydrogen fuel cells from Canada.
These companies are running circles around their American counterparts. Ford is only making 20,000 Escape Hybrids this year, and GM's brand won't be on the market until 2007. As falling demand for gas-hungry SUVs has contributed to Standard and Poor reducing the bond rating of these companies to junk status, these giants of the car industry now find themselves in the shadow of companies and countries that realize the time has come to move away from an oil economy.
So here we are. We have people paying record prices at the pump and America sending billions overseas to the world's most volatile region. We have countries such as China and India using energy technology to create jobs and wealth while our own businesses and workers fall further and further behind.
And we have the Energy bill that is before us today.
Now, this bill takes some small steps in the right direction. It will require utilities to generate 10 percent of their electricity from renewable sources. It will help us realize the promise of ethanol as a fuel alternative by requiring 8 billion gallons to be mixed with gasoline over the next few years, and by providing a tax credit for the construction of E85 stations all over America. It will provide funding for the clean coal technologies that will move America to use its most abundant fossil fuel in a cleaner, healthier way, including for low-emission transportation fuels. It will support the development of 500 mile-per-gallon automobile technology. And it will provide a good mix of tax incentives to move America towards more energy efficiency instead of simply rewarding the oil and gas industries, as the House bill does. The good that these proposals will do is reason enough to vote for this bill, and I will do so.
But we shouldn't kid ourselves today. This isn't time to pat ourselves on the back and think we have put America on the path to energy independence. Experts say that this bill will reduce our foreign oil consumption by 3 percent. Three percent. Our own Department of Energy predicts that American demand will jump by 50 percent over the next 15 years. So 3 percent doesn't amount to much — and it certainly won't make a difference at the pump. Even President Bush admits this. We tried to pass an amendment that would have reduced our foreign oil dependence by 40 percent in 2025, but too many Senators said no.
And so when you look at this energy crisis and realize that it is about so much more than energy, when you realize that our national security is at stake and that the global standing of our economy hangs in the balance, when you see prices continue to rise and other countries continue to innovate, you can't help but ask yourself, "Is this the best America can do?" The country that went to the Moon and conquered polio? The country that led the technological revolution of the 1990s?
It would be one thing if the solutions to our dependence on foreign oil were pie-in-the-sky ideas that are years away. But the technology is right at our fingertips. Today, we could have told American car companies, we will help you produce more hybrid cars. We could have made sure there were more flexible fuel tanks in our cars. We could have addressed the big reason why car companies are hurting in this country — legacy health care costs. Had we taken all of these actions, we could have put America on the path to energy independence once and for all.
We also could have addressed the fact that global warming is threatening us with higher temperatures, more drought, more wildfire, more flooding, and more erosion of our coastal communities. People who don't believe this can yell about it as loudly as they want, but it doesn't change the fact that the overwhelming scientific evidence proves this over and over again. We could have taken care of this problem now and left a better world to our children.
With each passing day, the world is moving towards new technology and new sources of energy that will one day replace our current dependence on fossil fuels.
And so America has a choice.
We can continue to hang on to oil as our solution. We can keep passing Energy bills that nibble around the edges of the problem. We can hope that the Saudis will pump faster and that our drills will find more. And we can just sit on our hands and say that it is too hard to change the way things are and so we might as well not even try.
Or we could realize that this issue of energy — this issue that at first glance seems like it is just about drilling or caribou or weird-looking cars — actually affects so many aspects of our lives that finding a solution could be the great project of our time.
It won't be easy and it won't be without sacrifice. Government can't make it happen on its own, but it does have a role in supporting the initiative that is already out there. Together, we can help make real the ideas and initiatives that are coming from scientists and students and farmers all across America.
Abraham Lincoln, who first opened our National Academy of Sciences, once said that part of Government's mission is to add "the fuel of interest to the fire of genius in the discovery of new and useful things."
Today, when it comes to discovering new and useful solutions to our energy crisis, the fire of genius burns strong in so many American innovators and optimists. But they're looking for leadership to provide the fuel that will light their way. This bill is a reasonable first step, but I know that we can do much, much better.

Mr. President, I would like to express my gratitude to the managers of the energy bill, Senators Domenici and Bingaman, for their support of two amendments that I offered. I am proud that these amendments have been included in the legislation that the Senate will vote on today, and I believe that their enactment will help America increase its energy independence and transition our energy industry to full usage of 21st century technologies.
The first adopted amendment, which was cosponsored by Senator Lugar, provides $85 million to three universities for research and testing on developing Illinois basin coal into transportation fuels, including Fischer-Tropsch jet fuel, a type of low-emissions diesel that can be used in jets and diesel. The funds provided in this amendment will assist Southern Illinois University, Purdue University, and the University of Kentucky in upgrading existing facilities and constructing new facilities to conduct research and testing on this technology. It is critical that our Government invests in domestic fossil fuel supplies in an innovative manner, and this is a commonsense way to expand our coal industry in an environmentally friendly manner.
The second adopted amendment, which was cosponsored by Senator Bayh, provides $40 million for research on combined plug-in hybrid and flexible fuel vehicles. Today, we have the technology to produce both plug-in hybrid vehicles, which run partly on electricity rather than fuel, and flexible fuel vehicles, which run on a blend of 85 percent renewable fuel and 15 percent petroleum. But we don't yet have the technology to combine both technologies into the same car. If we could do this, there is the potential for developing a car that could get 500 miles per gallon of gasoline. At a time when our country spends billions of dollars a year on importing foreign oil, it is imperative that we take meaningful, proactive steps that not only stem our future oil dependence but also reduce our reliance on overseas sources. My amendment would do just that by stimulating the commercialization of this technology at a cost of only 6 percent of our Nation's daily spending on foreign oil.
Again, I thank the bill managers for their assistance with these amendments.
I ask unanimous consent to have the following two articles on the potential of combined plug-in hybrid/flexible fuel vehicles printed in the Record.

Mr. President, from June 12-16, 2005, students from the great State of Illinois were invited to Washington, DC, by the National History Day Program to present original history projects. This scholarly group of students used their critical thinking and research skills to create exhibits, documentaries, and performances on the theme, "Communication in History: The Key to Understanding."
Congratulations to the national qualifiers and finalists from Illinois: Audrey Auyeung, Zoe Netter, Charlotte Cook, Eric Jacobson, David Gainski, Lucy Honold, Chelsea Farmer, Brandon Jakub, Kyle Schoenfelt, Dakota Smith, Erich Grundman, Charlie Curran, Jonathan Taub, Alicia Patten, Peter Contos, Honghe Li, Sebastian Prokuski, Laura Muller-Soppart, Tomas Manghi, Elizabeth May, Aruj Chaudhry, Kyle Johnson, Kathryn Evans, Laura Guzman, Rebecca Strauss, Andriy Matyukha, Sean Gallagher, Brendon Gallagher, Dan Burasinsanga, Gian Santos, Mary Kowalkowski, Ellie Terrell, Lauren Brown, Nadine Ibrahim, Annika Kolasa, Courtney Kolbe, Marissa Suchyta, David Bailey, Joseph Tepper, Tamara Vaughn, Stephanie Ebbs, Lena Walker, Maria Carvell, Robby Krajewski, Allyson Schroeder, Elizabeth Hamman, Emily Dennis, Lisa Furby, Katie Damron, Andrea Martinelli, Cristen Sawicki, Kelsey McMahon, Amelia Wallace, Allison Nichols, Sarah Siegel, Eliseo Martinez, and Jessica Drachenberg. Special congratulations to Marrissa Suchyta, the second place winner in the junior individual documentary category, and Aruj Chaudhry, the third place winner in the senior individual paper category.
Finally, dedicated Illinois teachers worked throughout the academic year with these students so that they could be successful in competing with over 500,000 students nationwide.
Congratulations to their teachers: Angie Carr, Balazs Dibuz, Mario Garcia, Melissa Craig, Ron Solberg, Carlton Oquendo, Betsy Brown, Patricia Grunde, Ann Patricia Duffy, Leslie Contos, David Barber, Sherri Massa, Chris Salituro, Aggie Nowak, Cathy Bednar, Peggy Hall-Heineman, Patricia Grimmer, Sandra Koehler, Janet Kelsey, Chris DeMato, Barry Bradford, Claire Finn, Therese Hawkins, Sandra Koehler, and Claire Finn.
I commend these students on their achievements and encourage them to continue their pursuit of academic excellence.

Mr. President, I rise today to speak in favor of the amendment offered by Senator Boxer regarding the testing of pesticides on humans. I am pleased to be a cosponsor of this amendment.
Unbeknownst to most of us, the Bush administration has quietly rescinded a ban on the human testing of pesticides even though the EPA is still developing guidelines for such testing. Instead of needlessly exposing people to dangerous pesticides, the 1-year moratorium proposed in this amendment is a reasonable solution until these guidelines are completed.
Let us be clear. We are not talking about the testing of life-saving medications. By definition, pesticides are designed to kill. They are potential carcinogens and neurotoxins. We need guidelines to ensure that human testing of these dangerous chemicals is limited and monitored and that the subjects fully understand the risks they are taking.
Who are the people being exposed to these chemicals? Typically they are young, poor and minorities. Let me give you two examples:
In Florida, an EPA study offered low-income families $970 over 2 years if they let their babies be tested after their homes were sprayed with pesticides. One can easily imagine a young mother trying to make ends meet, trying to pay the rent and put food on the table, reading that she can collect almost $1,000 if she allows her child to be tested.
In another study last year, 127 young adults, mostly Asian and Latino college students, agreed to be exposed to a suspected neurotoxicant for $15 an hour. Some were exposed in a chamber for 1 hour for 4 consecutive days, while others had the chemical shot into their eyes and nostrils at amounts 12 times the OSHA recommended levels. This chemical, chloropicrin, has a history: It was used as a chemical warfare agent in World War I. Yet the consent form for the 2004 study did not disclose that fact; it simply said, "We expect the discomfort to be short-lived."
All across America, there are college students working long hours so they can stay in school and get a shot at the American dream. How tempting it must be to pick up a handful of cash for letting a scientist expose you to some chemical. You are healthy, you need the cash, and you are probably not as wise as your parents would like you to be, so you borrow a chance against your future health and sign up for exposure. That is not the kind of government policy we want to be encouraging.
All told, the EPA is considering data from 24 studies that tested pesticides on humans. Many of these studies are flawed, so the risks these people undertook did not even contribute to a scientifically valid experiment. Many of these studies failed to take the health complaints of the subjects seriously, many failed to disclose the risk to the subjects, and many failed to conduct long-term monitoring of the health effects of the pesticides. All of these deficiencies should be addressed and prevented from occurring again.
Sadly, we do not need to do this human testing. For years, the EPA has worked with pesticide manufacturers and members of the science community without relying on human testing. For years, the agency has accomplished its goals through animal testing.
No one doubts that actual human health data, if properly collected from a sufficient sample size, would be advantageous to know. But sensible guidelines are needed to ensure that the benefits of any study far outweigh the potential risks to the study participants.
The commonsense approach is to temporarily stop this testing, wait for EPA to issue its guidelines, and safeguard the health of the human subjects.
I thank the Senator from California for her commitment to this issue, and I yield the floor.
I reserve the balance of my time and yield the floor.

Mr. President, I speak about the plight of children afflicted by elevated levels of lead in their blood. Although it has been three decades since lead was a component of paint, the effects of lead paint continue to linger in homes across the country. As the lead paint flakes off, the dust is inhaled, and some kids eat the chips.
Lead is a highly toxic substance that can produce a range of health problems in young children, including damage to the kidneys, the brain, and bone marrow. Even low levels of lead in pregnant women, infants, and children can affect cognitive abilities and fetal organ development and lead to behavioral problems.
Over 430,000 children in America have dangerously high blood lead levels. This is a particularly serious problem for Illinois, which has the highest number of lead-poisoned children in the nation. In Chicago alone, 6,000 children have elevated blood lead levels.
In 1992 Congress passed the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act. The law required the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, to promulgate regulations by October 1996 regarding contractors engaged in home renovation and remodeling activities that create lead-based paint hazards. Renovation and repair of older residences is the principal source of lead-paint exposure to U.S. children. According to Federal studies, a large majority of the approximately 20 to 30 million renovations done on older homes each year are done without lead-safe cleanup and contamination practices.
The EPA analysis has found that a lead paint regulation would protect 1.4 million children and prevent 28,000 lead-related illnesses every year. Such a regulation would also lead to a net economic benefit of between $2.7 billion and $4.2 billion each year.
Despite the clear health and economic benefits, these regulations are now 9 years overdue, and there is no sign that EPA is moving any closer to issuing the required rules. Last month, I joined with Senator Boxer and Representatives Waxman, Lynch, and Towns to express our concern about EPA's complete disregard of the statutory mandate to issue lead paint regulations.
To address the problem, I have introduced an amendment that would stop EPA from spending money on any actions that are contrary to Congress' 1992 mandate to issue lead paint regulations, including any delaying of the regulations. I thank the managers of this bill, Senator Burns and Senator Dorgan, for their support of this amendment and for including it in the bill.
I hope EPA will read this amendment and understand that the time for these common-sense lead regulations is long overdue.

Mr. President, as the previous speaker, I rise to speak on the Central American Free Trade Agreement.
I have thought long and hard about this agreement, and I come to the floor predisposed to support free trade. In the end, I believe that expanding trade and breaking down barriers between countries is good for our economy and for our security, for American consumers and American workers.
On the margins, I recognize that CAFTA, although a relatively modest trade agreement by the standards of the U.S. economy, would benefit farmers in Illinois as well as agricultural and manufacturing interests across the country. The language in the agreement is also optimal with respect to intellectual property and telecommunications, issues that are of particular interest when it comes to trade with other countries, such as China. Unfortunately, CAFTA falls short, as a matter of process and substance, in protecting workers' rights and interests. My colleague, Senator Bingaman, mentioned some of those concerns.
I recognize that we should not kid ourselves into believing that voting against free-trade agreements will stop globalization, especially agreements like CAFTA, where the countries involved have combined economies one-sixth the size of the State of Illinois.
Globalization is not someone's political agenda. It is a technological revolution that is fundamentally changing the world's economy, producing winners and losers along the way. The question is not whether we can stop it, but how we respond to it. It is not whether we should protect our workers from competition, but what can we do to fully enable them to compete against workers all over the world.
That brings me to the problem. So far, America has not effectively answered these questions, and American workers are suffering as a result. I meet these workers all across Illinois — workers whose jobs moved to Mexico or China and are now competing with their own children for jobs that pay $7 an hour and offer no health or pension benefits. In town meetings and union halls, I have tried to tell these workers the truth — that the jobs they have lost are not coming back; that globalization is here to stay; and that they are going to have to train more and learn more to get the new jobs of the future.
I don't mind delivering that message. But when these same workers ask me exactly how are they going to get their training and their education, and when they ask what will they do to pay for their health care bills in the interim, and how will they deal with lower wages and the general sense of financial insecurity that seems to be growing every single day, I cannot look them in the eye and tell them honestly that their Government is doing a single thing about these problems.
Since I have arrived in the Senate, I haven't seen us debate — much less pass — legislation that would address these issues. That is the reason I will be voting against CAFTA when it comes up later today.
There are real problems in the agreement itself. It fails to uphold the principles set out in previous trade agreements that say we must give equal protection to the rights of workers and the rights of commercial interests. But CAFTA, while encouraging the protection of commercial rights, does less to protect labor rights than some of the agreements that we have already passed. So there is a sense that we may be going backward instead of forward. Nor does CAFTA do much in the way of enforcing environmental standards in these countries.
I recognize that no piece of legislation is perfect, and if it were just these provisions, perhaps I could do what my colleague from New Mexico has done and obtain a letter of agreement from the White House, indicating they will try to address some of these problems.
But the real problem is more than CAFTA. It goes beyond the four corners of this piece of legislation. The real problem is what is missing, generally, from our prevailing policy on trade and globalization: meaningful assistance for those who are not reaping the benefits of trade, and a plan to equip American workers with the skills and support they need to succeed in the 21st century.
So far, almost all of our energy and almost all of these trade agreements are about making life easier for the winners of globalization, while we do nothing for those who find their lives getting harder as a consequence of trade liberalization. In 2004, nearly 150,000 workers were certified as having lost their jobs due to trade and were thus eligible for trade adjustment assistance — and that number doesn't count the janitors and cafeteria workers who may have lost their jobs.
Senator Wyden and others have tried to encourage the Administration to modernize this assistance and expand it to displaced service workers, but the Administration refuses to help on this issue.
But even beyond displaced workers, our failure to respond to globalization is causing a race to the bottom that means lower wages and stingier health and retiree benefits for all Americans. It is causing a squeeze on middle-class families who are working harder but making even less and struggling to stay afloat in this new economy.
I recognize the soundness of the economic argument that free trade reduces overall prices in this country. But as one downstate worker told me during a recent visit back in Illinois: "It doesn't do me much good if I am paying a dollar less on a t-shirt, but I don't have a job."
So now we have to choose. It is a choice that is bigger than CAFTA and bigger than our trade agreements. It is one that America has faced time and time again in our history, and we have responded. To ease our transition from an agricultural to an industrial economy, we set up the public school system, busted up monopolies, and allowed workers to organize. To help us emerge from the Great Depression, we regulated the market, created unemployment insurance, and provided all workers access to a secure retirement. At the end of World War II, we grew the largest middle class in history by providing our returning heroes with a chance to go to college and own their own homes.
Now we face the same choice. We are at the same juncture today. We have to decide whether we are going to sit idly by and do nothing while American workers continue to lose out in this new world, or if we will act to build a community where — at the very least — everybody has a chance to work hard, get ahead, and reach their dreams.
If we are to promote free and fair trade — and we should — then we have to make a national commitment to prepare every child in America with the education they need to compete; to make sure college is affordable for everybody who wants to go; to provide meaningful retraining and wage insurance so that even if you lose your job, you can train for another; to make sure worker retraining helps people without getting them caught up in a bureaucracy; that such training helps service workers as well as manufacturing workers; and that it encourages people to reenter the workforce as soon as possible.
We also have to figure out a way to tell workers that no matter where you work or how many times you switch jobs, you can take your health care and your pension with you always, so you have the flexibility to move to a better job or start a new business.
All of this is possible. It is not going to be easy, and it is not going to be quick. I don't expect the Administration to try to shoehorn all the solutions to the displacements caused by globalization into a single trade agreement. But what I do expect — and I said this directly to the President when I met with him in the White House on this matter — is that we at least have, on a parallel track, an effort to deal with the losers in globalization, our displaced communities and displaced workers. We must not only look after profits and shareholders, but also those folks who are adversely affected by trade. Lower prices are good and important, but we also have to make sure that jobs exist that provide people the opportunity to raise a family.
Mr. President, in order to compete, every single one of us is going to have to work more, think more, train more. I am not afraid of global competition, and I don't think a single American worker is afraid of it. We cannot insulate ourselves from all of the dislocations brought about by free trade, and most of the workers don't expect Washington to do so. On my side of the aisle, we cannot resort to protectionist language over the long term if we are, in fact, going to be looking toward the future of America. We have the talent and the brain power to continue to lead the world in this challenging new century, but now we need the political will. Now we need a national commitment. And that, so far, is what appears to be lacking on Capitol Hill.
In America, we have always furthered the idea that everybody has a stake in this country, that we are all in it together, and that everybody deserves a shot at opportunity. The imbalance in this Administration's policies, as reflected in the CAFTA debate, fails to provide American workers with their shot at opportunity. It is time we gave them that shot.
I yield back my time.
(Applause in the Gallery.)

Mr. President, I rise today in support of H.R. 3057, the Foreign Operations appropriation bill. I would also like to highlight one aspect of the bill.
Since coming to the Senate 6 months ago, one of the foreign policy and health issues I have focused on relates to the avian flu. I am pleased that this bill includes $10 million to combat the spread of this potential pandemic, adding to the $25 million that the Senate provided in the supplemental appropriations bill in April.
I thank the managers of this bill, Senators McConnell and Leahy, and their staffs for working with me on this important issue. I know that Senator McConnell has a longstanding interest in Southeast Asia, and Senator Leahy has always been a champion of international health issues, making the avian flu something I know they both care deeply about.
In the last few weeks, scientists have reported that a deadlier version of the avian flu has now spread to migrant birds that could carry the disease out of Asia and across the world.
While it may not seem that threatening to many Americans at first, this bird flu could easily transform into a human flu. And if it does, it could be one of the deadliest flus mankind has ever known — even worse than the 1918 flu pandemic that killed 675,000 Americans and 50 million worldwide.
Already, there have been 108 human cases of avian flu, resulting in 54 deaths. And while the virus has not yet mutated into a full-blown human flu, recent developments suggest it might be heading in that direction. In recent months, the virus has been detected in mammals that have never previously been infected, including tigers, leopards and cats.
A few weeks ago, the World Health Organization reported that avian flu strains in Vietnam are lasting longer and spreading to more humans. And according to government officials, a few cases of human-to-human spread have already occurred.
Every day, there are new reports about the increasing dangers of the avian flu. Last month, it was revealed that Chinese farmers have tried to suppress outbreaks of the avian flu by using human antiviral drugs on infected animals.
As a result, one strain of the virus has become resistant to these drugs, thus making the drugs ineffective in protecting humans against a possible pandemic. And just this week, researchers found that ducks infected with the virus were contagious for up to 17 days, causing the animals to become — in the researchers' words--"medical Trojan horses" for transmitting the disease to humans.
Simply put, the world is not ready for a potential outbreak of this deadly flu. In fact, we aren't even close.
There is no known vaccine for the avian flu, and producing one could take months once an outbreak occurs. And while the World Health Organization recommends that every nation stockpiles enough flu treatment to treat a quarter of its population, the United States has only ordered enough to treat less than 1 percent of ours.
We can't just stand by and hope that this virus doesn't reach our shores when it only takes hours to travel from one side of the world to the other. It is time for America to lead the world in taking decisive action to prevent a potential global tragedy.
We should start by doing what we can to fight the virus while it is still mainly in Southeast Asia. That is why I fought for and obtained $25 million for prevention efforts by the CDC, the Agency for International Development, the Health and Human Services Department, and other agencies. And that is why I requested another $10 million in this bill.
In addition, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved language that I offered directing President Bush to form a senior-level task force to devise an international strategy to deal with the avian flu and coordinate policy among our government agencies. I hope that the Bush administration forms this task force immediately without waiting for legislation to be passed.
Yet, these are only modest first steps. International health experts believe that Southeast Asia will be an epicenter of influenza for decades. That is why we need to create a permanent framework for curtailing the spread of future infectious diseases — a framework that would increase international disease surveillance, response capacity and public education and coordination, especially in Southeast Asia.
But we must also prepare our own country in the event that a global pandemic reaches America. That is why I recently introduced the AVIAN Act, which helps make sure that Americans are protected from a possible outbreak of the avian flu.
When the threat is this real, we should be increasing research into possible flu vaccines, and we should be ordering enough doses of flu treatment to cover the recommended 25 percent of our population — just like England and other Western countries have done.
We should also ensure that our Health and Human Services Department and State governments put in place a plan as to how they would address a potential flu pandemic, including the purchasing and distributing of vaccines. A year after a draft of a Federal plan was published, a final version has yet to be finalized. We shouldn't have to wait any longer, because the avian flu certainly won't.
We are extremely fortunate that so far, the avian flu has not been found in the United States. But in an age when you can board planes in Bangkok or Hong Kong and arrive in Chicago, Burlington or Louisville in hours, we must face the reality that these exotic killer diseases are not isolated health problems half a world away, but direct and immediate threats to security and prosperity here at home.
Again, I thank Senators McConnell and Leahy for including this important funding in the supplemental appropriations bill and now including additional funding in this bill. And I thank the distinguished chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Lugar, for his leadership on this issue.
I ask unanimous consent that several articles and editorials about the avian flu be printed in the Record.

Mr. President, I rise today to introduce the Drinking Water Security Act of 2005.
This bill would reauthorize a portion of the Safe Drinking Water Act, first enacted in 2002, that instructs the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, and the Centers for Disease Control to develop the tools needed by American drinking water systems to detect and respond to the introduction of biological, chemical, and radiological contaminants by terrorists. My bill also would require EPA to report on its progress in developing and implementing these detection and response systems since 2002.
Like most Americans, I want to rise in the morning, make some coffee, and take a shower without worrying if that water has somehow been tampered with overnight by terrorists. Safe drinking water is something we traditionally have taken for granted in this country. This bill will continue the good work our scientists have been doing to monitor, detect, and negate any chemical, biological, or radiological agents that terrorists could introduce into our drinking water, should they manage to get past our physical security measures. This bill would also help implement appropriate warning systems in the event of a terrorist attack on our water systems.
I do not want to be an alarmist. But, September 11 changed Americans' views on the possibility of the improbable and turned our focus to preparedness. This bill is all about preparedness. It provides the authorization and oversight needed to continue to develop those tests and responses so we can stay one step ahead of potential terrorists.
I hope all of my colleagues join me in supporting this commonsense bill and ensuring that our drinking water remains safe.

Mr. President, on May 3, 2005, Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings announced the selection of 141 outstanding American high school seniors as the 2005 Presidential Scholars. The Presidential Scholars Program serves to honor outstanding students for their accomplishments in academics or the arts, as well as for their leadership, character and civic contributions to their schools and communities.
The United States Presidential Scholars Program was established in 1964 by Executive order of President Lyndon B. Johnson. The Presidential Scholars Program annually selects one male and one female student from each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, American students living abroad, 15 at-large students, and up to 20 students in the arts. The students are selected on the basis of outstanding scholarship, service, leadership, and creativity through a rigorous selection and review process administered by the Department of Education. Over 5,000 of the Nation's top students have been honored as Presidential Scholars since this prestigious program's founding.
Of the 141 exceptional students recognized from across the United States for 2005, I would especially like to recognize three students from the great State of Illinois for their accomplishments.
I send my congratulations to the following students for their accomplishments in academics: Kelly A. Zalocusky from Belleville High School East in Belleville, IL, and her teacher Philip C. Short; and Edgar P. Woznica from Fenwick High School in Oak Park, IL, and his teacher Ramzi Farran. For her accomplishments in the arts, I would like to congratulate Marcella J. Capron from Loyola Academy in Wilmette, IL, and her teacher Leslie Yatabe.
Please join me in congratulating the 2005 Presidential Scholars for their accomplishments in academics and the arts. I wish them all the best in their future endeavors.

Mr. President, today I rise to congratulate an Illinois resident who has received national recognition for her contributions to the American artistic community. Ms. Albertina Walker of Chicago, the "Queen of Gospel Music," has been selected to receive a National Heritage Fellowship by the National Endowment for the Arts, NEA.
The highest honor in the field of folk and traditional arts, these fellowships are awarded to 12 outstanding artists each year to recognize their contributions to their fields. They are selected based on their artistic excellence and cultural authencity.
National Heritage Fellowships are not open to application but are based on nominations from members of the public. Begun in 1982, these fellowships consist of a $20,000 grant and are part of the NEA's mission of supporting excellence in the arts, both new and traditional. Previous National Heritage Fellowship recipients have included such artists as B.B. King and John Lee Hooker.
The Grammy-award winning Ms. Walker is a native of Chicago and has been involved in gospel music for over 70 years. She has recorded over 60 albums and is an active member of West Point Missionary Baptist Church.
I thank the National Endowment for the Arts for its recognition of Ms. Walker's outstanding work and once again applaud Ms. Walker for her achievement.

Mr. President, I rise today to speak about S. 397, the protection of lawful commerce in arms bill, also known as the gun liability immunity bill. Regardless of whether you support this bill or oppose this bill, I can certainly understand that the issue of gun liability is an important one.
But let me ask my colleagues: Is this really more important than all the other important issues before the Senate right now? With only a few days left before the August recess, is giving liability protection to gun manufacturers really more important than passing the Department of Defense authorization bill during a time of war? Even this bill's most vocal supporters could not make this argument with a straight face.
As I travel around my State of Illinois talking to constituents, I hear many concerns from them. They tell me about the lack of affordable health care, the quality of our Nation's schools, the rising cost of gasoline, and the war in Iraq. Parents worry about how the budget deficit will affect their children's future. Veterans complain about the long delays in applying for and receiving disability benefits and about the amount of those benefits.
My constituents have no shortage of suggestions and ideas for what Congress should be doing, but I can honestly say that none of them are saying, "Senator, please go back to Washington and make sure that gun companies aren't being sued by victims of gun violence." I haven't heard that one yet.
And that is why I have chosen to speak on the floor today to — highlight the misplaced priorities of the Senate's leadership. Even though we have 139,000 troops fighting for our freedom in Iraq and a $440 billion Defense bill that could help these troops, we are here debating gun liability instead of talking about how to strengthen our national defense.
That is regrettable, and that is one of the reasons why so many Americans are disillusioned with their Government. Because we are not focusing on the problems that truly matter to them. Because some are more interested in scoring political points, or catering to a special interest.
I believe — as do my Democratic colleagues — that the first priority of the Senate should be to provide for our men and women who are in harm's way. And that means spending the necessary time to debate the Defense bill. If that takes us the rest of the week — or even next week — then that is what we should do.
How can we go home to our constituents in August and tell them that we left Washington, DC without finishing a bill to help our military because we spent too much time protecting gun manufacturers? That is shameful.
I have talked to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, and many of them were planning to offer good, commonsense, bipartisan amendments to the DOD bill — amendments that would have helped our military and strengthened our national defense. I also have filed several amendments that I would have offered, and I believe that many of my colleagues would have supported them as well.
One of my amendments would have protected members of the National Guard and Reserve against employment discrimination. This amendment is supported by the Reserve Officers Association and is cosponsored by Senator Salazar.
I have heard that there have been instances where prospective employers are reluctant to hire guard and reservists because of fears that these employees could be called up for extended tours of duty. These citizen-soldiers are getting through initial stages of interviews only to be summarily dropped from the process upon disclosing the fact that they are members of the Guard and Reserve.
My amendment would have gotten to the heart of this problem by preventing employers from forcing members of the Guard and Reserve to disclose their military service during the interview process. However, my amendment would not have prohibited them from disclosing their military status if they thought it would be beneficial during an interview process.
But instead of helping members of the Guard and Reserve, we are talking about gun manufacturer liability. That is wrong.
Another amendment I would have offered relates to the medical records of our servicemembers.
For years, the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs have attempted to modernize their medical records to create a two-way exchange of patient health data to better care for our Nation's service members. This would decrease costs and improve the flow of information when active members of the military leave the DOD system and move to the VA system. Greater use of technology would also reduce medical errors, which kill up to 98,000 people a year.
Unfortunately, the DOD has not managed to create a fully functional electronic medical records system. Last year, a GAO report found that one of the primary reasons for the delay in developing this system is the lack of congressional oversight.
My amendment would have helped provide some of that oversight. I wanted to get some answers from DOD on why this project is being delayed and how the Department is proceeding with this important project.
But debate over these amendments, and many others, is being silenced in favor of the one we are having now — about helping gun manufacturers.
This is why the American people are tired of what goes on in this town. Because there are real issues they sent us here to debate — real problems they expect us to solve. But even when we have a chance to do this — even when we have a defense bill where we could add amendments that could help our troops and care for our veterans — the Senate passes on that chance and heads directly into another fight singed with more politics and more ideology.
We can do better than that. We owe ourselves better — and we certainly owe the American people better.
I ask unanimous consent that an article from Army Times, criticizing the Senate leadership's decision to stop consideration of the DOD bill, be included in the Record.

Mr. President, I rise to commend the chief sponsors of this bill in the Senate, Senators Domenici and Bingaman, who I think have displayed the sort of statesmanship and civility in working out this difficult legislation that I think all of us expect from this body. I also want to indicate the degree to which this bill takes significant steps in the right direction on energy policy. It helps us realize the promise of ethanol as a fuel alternative by requiring 7.5 billion gallons to be mixed with gasoline over the next few years. It provides a tax credit for the construction of E85 stations all over America — E85, a blend of ethanol and gasoline that can drastically increase fuel efficiency standards for our cars.
It will provide funding for the clean coal technologies that will move America to use its most abundant fossil fuel in a cleaner, healthier way, including more low emission transportation fuels, and it will support the development of what we hope ultimately will be a 500-mile-per-gallon automobile technology.
All of these things are wonderful and worthy of support. But I do have to say we have missed an opportunity and that is not the fault of the sponsors of this bill who have done yeoman's work. Rather, I think it is the timidity of all of us as a body in not addressing what has to be one of the most significant problems we face as a nation.
The Department of Energy predicts that American demand for fossil fuels will jump 50 percent over the next 15 years. The Heritage Foundation says this bill will do virtually nothing to reduce our dependence on foreign oil. Even President Bush and supporters of the bill in Congress concede as much.
As we debate this bill today, the price of crude oil has surpassed a record high of $60 a barrel, and gas is now up to $2.28 per gallon. At this price, the United States is sending $650 million overseas every single day.
As demand continues to skyrocket around the world, other countries have started to realize that guzzling oil is not a sustainable future. What is more, these countries have realized that by investing early in the energy-efficient technology that exists today, they can create millions of tomorrow's jobs and build their economies to rival ours.
China now has a higher fuel economy standard than we do, and it has 200,000 hybrids on its roads. Japan's Toyota is doubling production of the popular Prius in order to sell 100,000 in the U.S. next year, and it is getting ready to open a brand new plant in China. At the same time, Ford is only making 20,000 Escape Hybrids this year, and GM's brand won't be on the market until 2007.
So here we are. People paying record prices at the pump and America sending billions overseas to the world's most volatile region. We have countries like China and India using energy technology to create jobs and wealth, while our own businesses and workers fall further and further behind. And we have the energy bill that is before us today.
So I ask, is this the best America can do? The country that went to the moon and conquered polio? The country that led the technological revolution of the 1990s?
It would be one thing if the solutions to our dependence on foreign oil were pie-in-the-sky ideas that are years away. But the technology is right at our fingertips. Today, we could have told American car companies, we will help you produce more hybrid cars. We could have made sure there were more flexible fuel tanks in our cars. And so America has a choice.
We can continue to hang on to oil as our solution. We can keep passing energy bills that nibble around the edges of the problem. We can hope that the Saudis will pump faster and that our drills will find more. And we can just sit on our hands and say that it is too hard to change the way things are and so we might as well not even try.
Or we could accept and embrace the challenge of finding a solution to one of the most pressing problems of our time, our dependence on foreign oil. It will not be easy and it will not be without sacrifice. Government cannot make it happen on its own, but it does have a role in supporting the initiative that is already out there.
I vote for this bill reluctantly today, disappointed that we have missed our opportunity to do something bolder that would have put us on the path to energy independence. This bill should be the first step, not the last, in our journey towards energy independence.
I close by saying I hope we do not wait another 5 years before we work on the important issue of energy independence. I plan to support this bill because of the fine work that was done by the sponsors, but I would insist that in the next year or two we immediately address the issue of how we can wean ourselves off of Middle Eastern oil.

Mr. President, I rise in support of the Interior appropriations conference report and to speak about two key provisions: one to protect our veterans and one to protect our kids.
First, the conference report includes a much needed $1.5 billion supplemental spending package for veterans health care. This $1.5 billion will cover the massive budgetary shortfall that Congress only recently discovered, and I hope this will prevent the loss of some important veterans health care services.
Earlier this year, I, along with my Democratic colleagues on the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee, repeatedly asked the Department of Veterans Affairs if the President's budget provided sufficient funds for veterans health care. The response we received was yes, the funds are sufficient.
Unfortunately, that response was not consistent with what folks on the ground were saying about VA health care services. They complained of long waiting periods for doctor's appointments, reduced office hours at veterans clinics, an increased demand for services, and reduced access. These voices were too loud to ignore, so I joined my colleagues Senator Murray and Senator Akaka here on the floor of the Senate to ask for additional funding for VA health care. Those efforts were defeated, but we knew that a possible crisis was on its way.
That crisis became a reality when it was discovered that the VA was more than $1.5 billion in the hole on its health care funding. Like many of my colleagues in the Senate, I was shocked by that admission.
I was pleased to join Senator Murray in cosponsoring both a stand-alone bill and an amendment to the Interior appropriations bill to get veterans the funding they need so they can get the health care that they have earned and deserve.
The $1.5 billion appropriated by today's Interior appropriations conference report will help ensure that our Nation's veterans get that health care. With this funding, our veterans facilities also will get the maintenance they need, and I hope the VA will be able to keep its hands out of its rainy day fund.
I don't think there is sone person in this Senate who would want to tell a returning soldier who fought and bled for our country: Sorry, but when it comes to getting health care, you are on your own.
I was right. The inclusion of this provision in the conference report proves that we can work together to do what is necessary for our Nation's veterans.
I thank Senator Murray, Senator Craig, and Senator Akaka for their leadership on this issue. I hope we can work together — as we do today — to ensure that veterans are not shortchanged next year. They deserve better.
Second, I want to thank my colleagues for including an amendment in the conference report that is important to parents of small children all over the country but particularly in my hometown of Chicago. I am referring to my amendment prohibiting EPA from spending tax dollars to delay the promulgation of regulations that are now 9 years overdue. These regulations, when promulgated, would require contractors to reduce lead paint exposure during home renovation and remodeling.
I have raised this issue with EPA on numerous occasions and reminded them of the serious health dangers that high blood lead levels pose for children. Now, reluctantly, EPA officials have promised me these rules will be issued by the end of the year. I intend to use this amendment to hold them to their word. So today when we pass this funding bill, I can tell the youngest, poorest citizens of Illinois that Congress is doing its part to keep them safe from lead paint exposure.
I ask unanimous consent that my letter to EPA Administrator Johnson regarding this issue be printed into the Record.

Mr. President, I am pleased that the conference report on H.R. 3, the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users, protects an important program administered by the Department of Transportation the Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Program also known as the DBE Program.
The DBE Program ensures that small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals are able to compete on a level playing field for federally funded highway and transit contracts.
I strongly endorse the DBE Program and am pleased that this program continues to enjoy bipartisan support.
Since the DBE Program was started in 1982, the field of highway contractors has grown more racially diverse. The DBE Program was expanded to include women in 1987, and that improvement to the program has opened the doors for women contractors to join what has traditionally been an all-male field. Despite the increased fairness and greater opportunity for minority and women contractors since the inception of DBE, there continues to be a strong need for the DBE Program.
Unfortunately, studies have shown that when DBE Programs end, many contractors simply revert to their old practices, denying contracts to small companies owned by minorities or the economically disadvantaged. It is clear that the DBE Program is still needed to secure the gains made and encourage even greater opportunity for these small businesses, and I am pleased that the conferees have recognized that continuing need and have retained this program.
Federally funded highway and transit contracts are big business, and it is imperative that we give everyone the big guys and the little guys a fair opportunity to take part. The DBE is vital to increasing participation in our federally funded highway projects.

Mr. President, I rise to address what has been a heartbreaking week for all of us. As was mentioned by my distinguished colleague from Washington, I just returned from a trip from Houston with former Presidents Clinton and Bush as part of a fund-raising effort to deal with the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. As we wandered through the crowd, we heard in very intimate terms some of the heart-wrenching stories that all of us have witnessed on television over the past several days: Mothers separated from their babies; adults mourning the loss of elderly parents; descriptions of the heat, filth, and fear of the Superdome and of the convention center in New Orleans.
There was an overriding sense of relief in Houston, and the officials in Houston and in the entire State of Texas deserve great credit for the outstanding job they have done in creating a clean and stable place for the tens of thousands of families who have been displaced.
A conversation I had with one woman captured the realities that are settling into the families as they face the future. She said to me: We had nothing before the hurricane, and now we have less than nothing. We had nothing before the hurricane, now we have less than nothing.
In the coming weeks, as the images of the immediate crisis fade and this Chamber becomes consumed with other matters, we will be hearing a lot about lessons learned and steps to be taken. I will be among those voices who will be calling for action. In the most immediate term, we will have to assure that the efforts at evacuating families from the affected States proceed — they are not finished yet — that these Americans who are having to flee their homes, their cities, their counties, and their towns are fed, clothed, housed, and provided with the medical care and medicine they need.
We are also going to have to make sure we cut through the redtape that has inexcusably prevented so much help from getting to the places where it is needed. I can say from personal experience over the last week how frustrating it has been, how unconscionable it has been to be unable to find somebody in charge so that we can get medical supplies, doctors, nurses, and other supplies down to the affected areas quickly enough.
We are going to have to make sure in this Chamber that any impediments that may continue to exist in preventing relief efforts from moving forward rapidly are eliminated.
Once we stabilize the situation, this country is going to face the enormous challenge in providing stability for displaced families over the months and years that it is going to take to rebuild. Already the State of Illinois has committed to accepting 10,000 displaced families. There are stories in Illinois, as there are all across the country, of churches, mosques, synagogues, and individual families welcoming people with open arms and no strings attached.
Indeed, if there is any bright light that has come out of this disaster, it is the degree to which ordinary Americans have responded with speed and determination, even as their Government has responded with what I consider to be unconscionable ineptitude, which brings me to the next point. Once the situation is stable, once families are settled for at least the short term, once children are reunited with their parents and enrolled in school and the wounds both on the outside and on the inside have healed, we are going to have to do some hard thinking about how we could have failed our fellow citizens so badly and how we will prevent such failures from ever occurring again.
It is not politics to insist that we have an independent commission to examine these issues. It is not politics. Indeed, one of the heartening things about this crisis has been the degree of outrage that has come from across the political spectrum — from across races, across incomes; the degree to which the American people sense that we can and we must do better, and a recognition that if we can't cope with a crisis that has been predicted for decades, a crisis in which we were given 4 to 5 days' notice, then how can we ever hope to respond to a serious terrorist attack in a major American city in which there is no notice and in which the death toll and the panic and the fear may be far greater?
That brings me to my final point. There has been a lot of attention in the media about the fact that those who were left behind in New Orleans were disproportionately poor and disproportionately African American. I have said publicly that I do not subscribe to the notion that the painfully slow response of FEMA and the Department of Homeland Security was somehow racially based. I do not agree with that. I think the ineptitude was colorblind. But what must be said is that whoever was in charge of planning and preparing for the worst-case scenario seemed to assume that every American has the capacity to load up the family in a SUV, fill it up with $100 worth of gasoline, stick some bottled water in the trunk, and use a credit card to check into a hotel on safe ground. I see no evidence of active malice, but I see a continuation of passive indifference on the part of our Government toward the least of us.
So I hope that out of this crisis we all begin to reflect — Democrats and Republicans, Black and White, young and old, poor and wealthy. I hope we all begin to reflect, not only on our individual responsibilities to our families and ourselves but on our mutual responsibilities to our fellow Americans, mutual responsibilities that reflect themselves in church and community organizations and block clubs but also express themselves through our Government.
I hope we realize the people of New Orleans were not just abandoned during the hurricane, they were abandoned long ago — to murder and mayhem in their streets, to substandard schools, to dilapidated housing, to inadequate health care, to a pervasive sense of hopelessness.
That is the deeper shame of this past week, that it has taken a crisis such as this to awaken in us the understanding of the great divide that continues to fester in our midst. That is what all Americans are truly ashamed about. That is what I am ashamed about. And the fact that we are ashamed about it is a good sign. The fact that all of us don't like to see such a reflection of this country that we love tells me that the American people have better instincts and a broader heart than our current politics would indicate. "We had nothing before the hurricane," the woman told me. "Now we have even less." I hope we all take the time to ponder the truth of that message.

Mr. President, today I speak in honor of Chief Justice William Rehnquist. The Chief Justice served this Nation's highest court with distinction and honor for more than three decades, and his career in public service started years earlier. Even as he battled cancer over the past year, he continued to be an example of personal strength, dignity, and fortitude. I join my colleagues in mourning his passing and offering my prayers to his family.
The Chief Justice was a staunch defender of the Supreme Court and an active, independent judiciary. He was admired as a warm and helpful colleague, a thoughtful mentor, and an extremely effective administrator of the federal court system. The courts were well cared for under his distinguished leadership.
Justice Rehnquist also engaged directly with many of the toughest constitutional controversies of the twentieth century. Although I often disagreed with his decisions, Justice Rehnquist's opinions have been the source of important scholarship and litigation. Like the Chief Justice he followed, the late Earl Warren, Justice Rehnquist will be remembered as an important historical figure whose legacy will impact generations of Americans.
I knew the Chief Justice only at a distance. As a lawyer and a constitutional law instructor, I was required to wrestle intellectually with his ideas and arguments, and to press my students to divine his judicial instincts and motivations. My regret is that I never got to know him personally, or even to join one of his legendary walks around the Capitol or monthly poker games. I know that his warmth and humor have touched many of my colleagues, and he will be missed.
Of course, the strength of our constitutional structure — is that it is greater than any individual. Each of us plays but a small role in designing or building or repairing that structure it is greater and more important than any of us. We mourn the passing of Justice Rehnquist and now look to the future and the important work to be done.

Mr. President, today I introduce a bill to provide some assistance to those tens of thousands of Americans who have found themselves in one of the worst nightmares I can imagine — they are separated from their spouses, their children, and their parents. These Americans are struggling to locate their loved ones displaced by the horrors of Hurricane Katrina. They are searching the Astrodome, combing the Internet, hoping that their family members have survived the storm and will get in touch with them. A similar plight is faced by those victims who have weathered the storm and want to tell their family and friends that they are okay.
I have received dozens of calls to my offices in Illinois from constituents asking my caseworkers to help them locate their relatives lost in the Gulf Coast. Greta from Chicago was looking for her Aunt Perra Lee. John from Romeoville was looking for his children and grandchildren in Biloxi. The calls kept coming, but my staff could only point these constituents to various nonprofit organizations doing their best to provide locator services. There was no centralized Federal Government system in place to deal with this issue. Such a system should be in place.
The government must provide these people with a means to let their families know that they are out of harm's way. Various non-profit organizations and news services have done a stellar job at using the Internet to connect displaced people with their families. Our government, through the Department of Homeland Security, should synthesize the best aspects of these services, so that after an emergency, displaced individuals can call one phone number or go to one website, and post their location and condition. Family members and law enforcement officials should be able use this same secure, centralized system to check the status of missing loved ones.
I am introducing a bill — the National Emergency Family Locator System Act that will instruct the Department of Homeland Security to create such a system. I hope that the next time our country experiences a disaster like Katrina, this system will provide worried families with some sense of relief.
I hope my colleagues will support this legislation and I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the Record.
There being no objection the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follow:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
This Act may be cited as the "National Emergency Family Locator Act".
In this Act: (1) Department.--The term "Department" means the Department of Homeland Security. (2) Emergency.--The term "emergency" has the meaning given the term in section 102 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5122). (3) Secretary.--The term "Secretary" means the Secretary of Homeland Security. (4) System.--The term "System" means the National Emergency Family Locator System established under section 3(a).
(a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish within the Department the National Family Locator System. (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the System are-- (1) to enable individuals displaced by an emergency to provide to the Department the name and location of the displaced individuals and any other relevant information using the telephone, the Internet, and other means determined to be appropriate by the Secretary; and (2) to enable the Department-- (A) to compile the information collected under paragraph (1); and (B) to provide the information collected and compiled under the System to the family members of the displaced individuals and law enforcement officials. (c) Considerations.--In establishing the System under subsection (a), the Secretary shall take into account and, to the maximum extent practicable, incorporate into the System-- (1) intermediary-based locator systems such as the National Next of Kin Registry; and (2) information from existing family locator databases, such as the Family News Network of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.

Mr. President. I rise in strong support of the amendment offered by Senator Harkin to increase funding for the Legal Services Corporation. I am proud to be a cosponsor of the amendment.
The Legal Services Corporation provides vital legal assistance to the poor around the country. It was created in 1974 with bipartisan congressional sponsorship and the support of the Nixon administration.
In Chicago, the Legal Services Corporation funds make it possible for the Legal Assistance Foundation to help my constituents navigate the foster care system and receive compensation after violent crimes. In Galesburg and Peoria, these funds make it possible for the Prairie State Legal Services organization to help people dealing with domestic violence issues and elder abuse.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, you can bet that Legal Services Corporation will be in Louisiana, Alabama, Mississippi, and the many States where hurricane victims are being relocated helping newly impoverished citizens obtain food and shelter assistance, health care and insurance benefits, unemployment insurance, Social Security benefits, and FEMA assistance.
This program makes a real difference in people's lives. Take the story of Irene and her family for example, who live in Section 8 housing and needed help. They visited the Prairie State Legal Services office in Illinois. Every day, Irene had to get two wheelchair-bound grandchildren up the stairs and into a second floor apartment. Both her grandchildren have cerebral palsy and are confined to wheelchairs. The oldest is now 14 and weighs 160 lbs. And after 11 years, as I am sure you can imagine, Irene was having a hard time getting her grandchildren up those stairs. But when she tried to make this difficult situation better, it only got worse.
Irene applied for and received a transfer certificate from Section 8 to allow her to move to a new apartment. But she could not find a first-floor apartment to transfer to within the 60 days that the transfer allowed. Irene tried calling the Section 8 offices to let them know of the delay, but she was forced to leave messages. When she finally sent a letter asking for a response to her messages, she was informed that she was too late — not only was the Public Housing Agency terminating her transfer, it was also terminating the Section 8 subsidy for her current apartment.
But that is when Prairie State and Legal Services Corporation intervened. A staff attorney represented Irene in an administrative appeal, and pointed out that under the Fair Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act, Irene had not been provided the support needed to assist her in finding an apartment. As a result of her attorney's efforts, Irene's subsidy was reinstated, she was given a new transfer certificate and was provided with active assistance in helping her find a new apartment.
Legal Services Corporation helps folks like Irene all across the country, from South Carolina to South Dakota, Illinois to Iowa. And when someone displaced by Hurricane Katrina cannot afford a lawyer but is having trouble getting her unemployment insurance or Social Security benefits, or getting her utilities turned back on, Legal Services Corporation will be right there. Legal Services Corporation-funded organizations have won dozens of awards, and groups ranging from AARP to the American Bar Association have voiced their strong support of LSC. We should do the same.
Over the last decade, the LSC budget has suffered $196 million in cuts. The Appropriations Committee proposed this year to cut $6 million more. I do not think this is the time to deny legal services to those who need them most. I believe that in light of the pressing crises confronting individuals in the gulf coast, we should be increasing funding for the Legal Services Corporation, not decreasing it. So I strongly support Senator Harkin's amendment, and I urge my colleagues to do the same.

Mr. President, one of the most striking things about the devastation caused by Hurricane Katrina is that the majority of stranded victims were our society's most vulnerable members — low-income families, the elderly, the homeless, the disabled. Many did not own cars. Many believed themselves unable to flee the city, unable to forego the income from missed work, unable to incur the expenses of travel, food and lodging. Some may have misunderstood the severity of the warnings, if they heard the warnings at all. Some may have needed help that was unavailable. Whatever the reason, they were not evacuated and we have seen the horrific results.
This failure to evacuate so many of the most desperate citizens of the Gulf Coast leads me to introduce today a bill to require states and the nation to consider the needs of our neediest citizens in times of emergency.
It appears that certain assumptions were made in planning and preparing for the worst case scenario in the Gulf Coast. After all, most of those who could afford to evacuate managed to do so. They drove out of town and checked into hotels or stayed with friends and family. But what about the thousands of people left behind because they had special needs?
How many of us will forget the tragedy that occurred at St. Rita's Nursing Home in St. Bernard Parish, LA, where an estimated 32 of the 60 residents perished in the rising floodwaters in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina?
Our charge as public servants is to worry about all of the people. I am troubled that our emergency response and disaster plans were inadequate for large segments of the Gulf Coast population. I wonder whether the plans in other regions are adequate. Perfect evacuation planning is obviously impractical, but greater advance preparation can ensure that the most vulnerable are not simply forgotten or ignored.
That's why the bill I am introducing today, along with co-sponsors Senators Bayh, Murray, Harkin, Levin, Corzine, Feingold, Bingaman and Kennedy, requires the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security to mandate each State to include plans for the evacuation of individuals with special needs during times of emergency. Such plans should not only include an explanation of how these people — low income individuals and families, the elderly, the disabled, those who cannot speak English — will be evacuated out of the emergency area and how the states will provide shelter, food, and water, to these people once evacuated.
Communities with special needs may be more challenging to accommodate, but they are every bit as important to protect and serve in the event of an emergency.
What we saw in the Gulf Coast cannot be repeated. We may not be able to control the wrath of Mother Nature, but we can control how we prepare for natural disasters.
I hope my colleagues will join me in supporting this legislation.

Mr. President, every year, the Inter-Association Task Force on Alcohol and Other Substance Abuse Issues, IATF, gives awards to three universities for their programs against underage drinking and over-consumption of alcoholic beverages. Bradley University, which is located in Peoria, IL, is among the three universities being commended and has the honor of being a National Collegiate Alcohol Awareness Week Winner for 2004-2005.
I applaud the Wellness Program at Bradley University for its commitment to reduce underage drinking. Alcohol misuse on college campuses is not a new problem. It is entrenched in the culture of many institutions of higher learning and in students' social lives. The abuse of alcohol among college students is taking its toll not only on the students who drink alcohol in excess but also their student peers, college administrators, health care personnel who counsel student drinkers, and the community at large.
Help, Encourage, and Teach, HEAT, and Social Norming, SONOR, are two programs that have proven to be effective at Bradley University. HEAT strives to provide students with opportunities to promote positive lifestyle choices, such as peer-led workshops and demonstrations. The SONOR program utilizes creative marketing and advertising strategies to disseminate information about healthy living. These programs are making a difference in the lives of our youth by encouraging college students to make healthy and responsible decisions.
Congratulations to Dr. Alan Galsky, Associate Provost for Student Affairs; Melissa Sage-Bollenbach, the Wellness Program Coordinator at Bradley University; Kelcy Hale, the President of Social Norming; and Chrisandra Ashby, the former president of HEAT for their tireless efforts and outstanding leadership.
Bradley University is to be commended for its innovative and influential alcohol-abuse programs. Representatives of Bradley University recently came to Washington, DC, and visited their Senator's offices to present their alcohol awareness programs. These award recipients also received a plaque and an award check from Dr. Edward Hammond, chairman of the IATF.
I wish the Wellness Program and its leadership the best of luck in their future endeavors and applaud their outstanding achievement. 

Mr. President, today I am submitting a resolution to express the Senate's strong disapproval of recent efforts to disenfranchise Americans.
In the weeks since Hurricane Katrina ravaged the Gulf Coast, our country has been awakened to the plight of the most vulnerable Americans — the poor, the elderly, the sick, and the disabled. And if we have learned anything from this tragedy, it is that the Government has too often ignored the needs of these citizens in crafting national policy. Whether it is homeland security or education or health care, these Americans have consistently been left behind.
Now, we are in danger of proceeding down another path that disregards the needs of our Nation's neediest — the right to vote. This is the most fundamental right protected by the Constitution and the right for which many Americans have fought and died.
The last two Presidential elections were tainted by allegations of fraud and abuse. The complaints ranged from long polling lines to faulty machines to confusing ballots. The rampant complaints have shaken people's confidence in our election system. And so it is all of our duty to work to restore and protect the integrity of the electoral process.
Unfortunately, in this new millennium, too many electoral reform efforts seem intent on limiting access to the ballot as opposed to expanding it. In the mid-20th century, the poll tax was the preferred means of disenfranchising large minority populations, specifically African Americans. Today, the poll tax is taking on a new form — a photo identification requirement for voters.
According to the National Commission on Federal Election Reform, such a requirement would "impose an additional expense on the exercise of the franchise, a burden that would fall disproportionately on people who are poorer and urban." Nevertheless, a number of States, including Georgia, have recently passed laws mandating government-issued photo identification for voters at the polls.
In Georgia alone, at least 150,000 senior citizens do not have government-issued photo identification, which can cost up to $85. Nationwide, at least 12 percent of eligible drivers do not have a driver's license. And Georgia has made it difficult for rural and urban folks to obtain their voter photo identification. There are currently only 56 places in all 159 counties where such identification is available, with no places available in Atlanta. For people who already lack transportation, which may be why they do not have driver's licenses, it is far-fetched to think that these same people could easily get to another county to obtain a voter identification card. Earlier today, the Carter-Baker Commission on Federal Election Reform released its recommendations for improving the electoral process. While many of the Commission's recommendations are worthy of consideration, its report recommends the implementation of a national voter identification requirement, despite acknowledging that there is "no evidence of extensive fraud in U.S. elections or of multiple voting."
This past weekend, Afghanistan held its second successful national election, and we have seen successes in Iraq's elections as well. If these nascent democracies can commit themselves to bringing any and all citizens to the polls, surely we can do the same.
Many of us both here in Washington and around the country have been asking questions over the past three weeks about our Nation's priorities and our commitment to helping our country's most vulnerable citizens. But a major priority should be ensuring that these citizens can exercise the most fundamental right in a democracy — the right to vote.
The resolution I am submitting today, along with Senator Dodd and joined by Senators Reid, Corzine, Clinton, Harkin, Feingold, Akaka, Dorgan, Kennedy, Kerry, Mikulski, Lautenberg and others, expresses the Senate's strong disapproval of photo identification requirements for voting. The resolution also urges the Department of Justice to challenge any State law that limits a citizen's ability to vote based on discriminatory photo identification requirements and urges the rejection of any national photo identification requirements for voting.
I am honored that Representative John Lewis, a civil rights icon who put his life on the line to fight for the right to vote, will be introducing the same resolution in the House later this week.
I urge my colleagues to support this important resolution.

Mr. President, I rise today to commend my colleague, the senior Senator from Illinois, Mr. Durbin, for his work in crafting this legislation, of which I am a cosponsor. This amendment would provide critically needed disaster relief to Illinois farmers who face significant financial jeopardy from crop losses due to this season's historic drought.
Illinois agriculture is experiencing one of the driest periods in the last century and certainly one of the most severe droughts in two decades. Illinois is the Nation's leading producer of corn and soybeans. However, U.S. Department of Agriculture, USDA, reports show that more than half of the corn crop and almost a third of the soybean crop have been decimated by drought. Of the 102 counties in Illinois, 98 have reported crop damage due to the lack of rainfall.
In July, Senator Durbin and I asked the Secretary of Agriculture to declare the affected counties in Illinois an agriculture disaster area. I am pleased that President Bush granted our request to give our Illinois farmers some much-deserved relief, qualifying Illinois farmers for USDA assistance programs, including low-interest emergency loans.
While this action provided an important amount of economic assistance, the scope and severity of this year's drought requires that additional measures be taken. At the present time, most of northern and western Illinois remains in a severe or extreme drought. Much of eastern Illinois is classified as abnormally dry. This is particularly alarming because farmers are at a critical point in the growing season.
Moreover, the reduction in fuel refining capacity caused by Hurricane Katrina has resulted in Illinois farmers facing a sudden surge in unanticipated fuel costs on top of already escalating fuel prices. The disruption in Mississippi River traffic at gulf ports, where half of the Nation's grain exports are shipped for foreign markets, has spiked shipping costs for farm commodities transported by barge downriver. The threat of an aflatoxin outbreak that affects corn during times of crop stress and drought is also of particular concern in recent weeks; should this condition progress after harvest and storage, farmers may face additional financial consequences in the coming months.
I understand that the Senior Senator from Mississippi, Mr. Cochran, has made a commitment to address this issue in the next hurricane supplemental appropriations bill that is sent to Congress. Given that commitment, I support Senator Durbin's decision to withdraw the amendment, and I thank Senator Cochran for his cooperation.

Mr. President, I rise today to support this important piece of legislation. As many of you know, the young soldiers returning from Iraq and Afghanistan are already coming home with post traumatic stress disorder. A recent Army study found that one in six soldiers in Iraq reported symptoms of major depression. Some experts predict that more than 100,000 soldiers may need some kind of mental health treatment when they come home.
It is not only our patriotic duty to provide these soldiers with the benefits they deserve; it is our moral duty at the most fundamental level. Unfortunately, PTSD is a disease that is still all too often misunderstood, and as I speak, there are efforts at the VA to require those folks who suffer PTSD to undergo additional scrutiny in the disability benefits process.
According to VA, it will review 72,000 cases in which the maximum amount of PTSD disability benefits was awarded. The rationale for reviewing these cases is VA's belief that 2.5 percent of these cases are "potentially fraudulent." But notably, this review will entirely ignore cases in which benefits may have been unjustly denied.
This review sends a troubling message to the brave men and women who defended this country. Too many veterans see the VA as a bureaucracy with the singular goal of denying services and benefits to veterans. This decision to reopen only approved PTSD claims merely serves to promote that impression.
It is unconscionable for our Government to put the onus on law-abiding veterans to affirmatively demonstrate that they are not engaging in fraud. The process of gathering evidence to prove PTSD disability is extremely time consuming. It requires the compilation of medical records, military service records, and testimony from other veterans who can attest to a person's combat exposure. I cannot fathom why the VA would require veterans to go through this emotionally painful process for a second time.
The VA — and our Nation's veterans — would be better served by creating nationwide standards for evaluating PTSD claims. As underscored by the inspector general's report in May that evaluated the chronic disparity between benefits received by veterans in Illinois and veterans in the rest of the country, PTSD is a highly subjective evaluation subject to significant variation. That same report uncovered significant variation in PTSD ratings from State to State — with Illinois consistently in the bottom rung for those ratings. The variation in PTSD ratings across the country may very well be the result of a lack of training or standardized practices on the part of the VA, not fraud on the part of our Nation's veterans.
I am pleased that Chairman Hutchison and Ranking Member Feinstein worked with me and Senators Durbin and Murray to include an amendment that prohibits the VA from proceeding with its review unless and until the VA reports to the Appropriations Committee on its plan for implementing this recommendation and outlines the staffing and funding requirements.
While this is an important provision, I am disappointed that there was no requirement that the VA look at denials of benefits as well as grants. To get an accurate and fair depiction of PTSD claims in this country, we need to ensure that denials are reviewed as well as grants of benefits. I will continue to work with my colleagues to see that this fundamental issue of fairness is addressed.
I also want to thank Chairman Hutchison and Ranking Member Feinstein for their assistance in accepting an amendment to provide notice to veterans in certain States about their right to seek a review of their cases.
This provision addresses an important issue in Illinois. As some of you may know, Illinois has for more than two decades ranked 50th out of all 50 States in terms of disability benefit compensation. This staggering disparity in payments may well be the result of poor staffing and a lack of standards for disability payments across the Nation.
I have been pleased that Secretary Nicholson has agreed to provide the veterans of Illinois with extra disability raters so that the veterans in Illinois who may have been unjustly denied benefits will have the opportunity to seek a special review of their cases.
Unfortunately, up to now, there has been no special effort made to alert veterans to this special opportunity. This amendment will provide the funds for information campaigns in states with less than average disability compensation rates. These campaigns will alert veterans of the past history of below-average disability benefit rates and provide these veterans with information on how to request a review of any past claims. The hiring of additional disability raters is important, but it is meaningless unless veterans know of their right to get their cases reopened.
I thank my colleagues for their assistance with these amendments.

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be dispensed with.

Mr. President, thank you very much. First of all, let me congratulate Senator Specter and Senator Leahy for moving the process of confirming the nomination of Judge Roberts along with such civility, a civility that I believe speaks well of the Senate.
Let me also say that I remain distressed that the White House during this confirmation process, which overall went smoothly, failed to provide critical documents as part of the record that could have provided us with a better basis to make our judgment with respect to the nomination. This White House continues to stymie efforts on the part of the Senate to do its job. I hope with the next nominee who comes up for the Supreme Court that the White House recognizes that in fact it is its duty not just to the Senate but to the American people to make sure we can thoroughly and adequately evaluate the record of every single nominee who comes before us.
Having said that, the decision with respect to Judge Roberts' nomination has not been an easy one for me to make. As some of you know, I have not only argued cases before appellate courts but for 10 years was a member of the University of Chicago Law School faculty and taught courses in constitutional law. Part of the culture of the University of Chicago Law School faculty is to maintain a sense of collegiality between those people who hold different views. What engenders respect is not the particular outcome that a legal scholar arrives at but, rather, the intellectual rigor and honesty with which he or she arrives at a decision.
Given that background, I am sorely tempted to vote for Judge Roberts based on my study of his resume, his conduct during the hearings, and a conversation I had with him yesterday afternoon.
There is absolutely no doubt in my mind Judge Roberts is qualified to sit on the highest court in the land. Moreover, he seems to have the comportment and the temperament that makes for a good judge. He is humble, he is personally decent, and he appears to be respectful of different points of view. It is absolutely clear to me that Judge Roberts truly loves the law. He couldn't have achieved his excellent record as an advocate before the Supreme Court without that passion for the law, and it became apparent to me in our conversation that he does, in fact, deeply respect the basic precepts that go into deciding 95 percent of the cases that come before the Federal court — adherence to precedence, a certain modesty in reading statutes and constitutional text, a respect for procedural regularity, and an impartiality in presiding over the adversarial system. All of these characteristics make me want to vote for Judge Roberts.
The problem I face — a problem that has been voiced by some of my other colleagues, both those who are voting for Mr. Roberts and those who are voting against Mr. Roberts — is that while adherence to legal precedent and rules of statutory or constitutional construction will dispose of 95 percent of the cases that come before a court, so that both a Scalia and a Ginsburg will arrive at the same place most of the time on those 95 percent of the cases — what matters on the Supreme Court is those 5 percent of cases that are truly difficult. In those cases, adherence to precedent and rules of construction and interpretation will only get you through the 25th mile of the marathon. That last mile can only be determined on the basis of one's deepest values, one's core concerns, one's broader perspectives on how the world works, and the depth and breadth of one's empathy.
In those 5 percent of hard cases, the constitutional text will not be directly on point. The language of the statute will not be perfectly clear. Legal process alone will not lead you to a rule of decision. In those circumstances, your decisions about whether affirmative action is an appropriate response to the history of discrimination in this country or whether a general right of privacy encompasses a more specific right of women to control their reproductive decisions or whether the commerce clause empowers Congress to speak on those issues of broad national concern that may be only tangentially related to what is easily defined as interstate commerce, whether a person who is disabled has the right to be accommodated so they can work alongside those who are nondisabled — in those difficult cases, the critical ingredient is supplied by what is in the judge's heart.
I talked to Judge Roberts about this. Judge Roberts confessed that, unlike maybe professional politicians, it is not easy for him to talk about his values and his deeper feelings. That is not how he is trained. He did say he doesn't like bullies and has always viewed the law as a way of evening out the playing field between the strong and the weak.
I was impressed with that statement because I view the law in much the same way. The problem I had is that when I examined Judge Roberts' record and history of public service, it is my personal estimation that he has far more often used his formidable skills on behalf of the strong in opposition to the weak. In his work in the White House and the Solicitor General's Office, he seemed to have consistently sided with those who were dismissive of efforts to eradicate the remnants of racial discrimination in our political process. In these same positions, he seemed dismissive of the concerns that it is harder to make it in this world and in this economy when you are a woman rather than a man.
I want to take Judge Roberts at his word that he doesn't like bullies and he sees the law and the Court as a means of evening the playing field between the strong and the weak. But given the gravity of the position to which he will undoubtedly ascend and the gravity of the decisions in which he will undoubtedly participate during his tenure on the Court, I ultimately have to give more weight to his deeds and the overarching political philosophy that he appears to have shared with those in power than to the assuring words that he provided me in our meeting.
The bottom line is this: I will be voting against John Roberts' nomination. I do so with considerable reticence. I hope that I am wrong. I hope that this reticence on my part proves unjustified and that Judge Roberts will show himself to not only be an outstanding legal thinker but also someone who upholds the Court's historic role as a check on the majoritarian impulses of the executive branch and the legislative branch. I hope that he will recognize who the weak are and who the strong are in our society. I hope that his jurisprudence is one that stands up to the bullies of all ideological stripes.
Let me conclude with just one more comment about this confirmation process.
I was deeply disturbed by some statements that were made by largely Democratic advocacy groups when ranking member Senator Leahy announced that he would support Judge Roberts. Although the scales have tipped in a different direction for me, I am deeply admiring of the work and the thought that Senator Leahy has put into making his decision. The knee-jerk unbending and what I consider to be unfair attacks on Senator Leahy's motives were unjustified. Unfortunately, both parties have fallen victim to this kind of pressure.
I believe every Senator on the other side of the aisle, if they were honest, would acknowledge that the same unyielding, unbending, dogmatic approach to judicial confirmation has in large part been responsible for the kind of poisonous atmosphere that exists in this Chamber regarding judicial nominations. It is tempting, then, for us on this side of the aisle to go tit for tat.
But what I would like to see is for all of us to recognize as we move forward to the next nominee that in fact the issues that are confronted by the Supreme Court are difficult issues. That is why they get up to the Supreme Court. The issues facing the Court are rarely black and white, and all advocacy groups who have a legitimate and profound interest in the decisions that are made by the Court should try to make certain that their advocacy reflects that complexity. These groups on the right and left should not resort to the sort of broad-brush dogmatic attacks that have hampered the process in the past and constrained each and every Senator in this Chamber from making sure that they are voting on the basis of their conscience.
Thank you very much, Mr. President. I suggest the absence of a quorum.

Mr. President, I rise to speak in support of the "Hurricane Katrina Fast-Track Refunds for Working Families Act of 2005," a bill I am introducing with Senators Murray, Corzine, Kerry, and Levin to accelerate the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit for some of the neediest victims of Hurricane Katrina.
A few weeks ago, I visited some of the victims who had been evacuated to the Reliant Center in Houston. These families have nothing left. Imagine having nothing left. All their belongings have been destroyed or washed away and most of their jobs have simply vanished.
We have done a lot of good work here in the Senate so far to bring tax relief and emergency support to these families. And many of us are hard at work now developing strategies for the long-term rebuilding of the Gulf Coast in such a way that doesn't re-create the poverty and inequality of the past but instead builds a more hopeful region with greater opportunity for all of its residents.
But there is more we can do quickly to help affected families reestablish and resettle their lives and also to stimulate their local economies. In the past we have accelerated tax refunds with the goal of economic stimulus. In 2001, Congress directed the IRS to provide an "advance tax rebate" of 2001 taxes, and, in 2003, Congress accelerated the Child Credit. Now, with the dual goals of economic stimulus and support for needy Americans, we should do it again.
Fast-tracking refunds will put money into the hands of parents that they can use for food, clothing, housing, transportation, medical services — whatever they need. How they spend the money is up to them. But it's up to us to make sure they get it as soon as possible. It's up to us to make sure the necessary outreach, systems, and delivery mechanisms are in place.
And that's what this legislation does. It directs the Secretary of the Treasury to refund or credit eligible taxpayers from the affected region as rapidly as possible and to take the steps necessary to get the funds into the hands of eligible recipients. Companion legislation has been introduced by Reps. Emanuel, Melancon, Taylor, and Lewis in the House of Representatives.
 By Mr. ENZI (for himself and Mr. Kennedy):
S. 1771. A bill to express the sense of Congress and to improve reporting with respect to the safety of workers in the response and recovery activities related to Hurricane Katrina, and for other purposes; read the first time.

Mr. President, it is my pleasure to join Senator Clinton to introduce legislation that will help us all find common ground on the debate over patient safety and medical malpractice claims.
Today, medical error is the eighth leading cause of death in the United States. Every year, these tragic mistakes cost the lives of up to 98,000 Americans. This is unacceptable in America, and we must do more to ensure that every patient gets the right care, at the right time, in the right way.
The debate in Washington over this issue has been centered on caps and lawsuits. But across America, hospitals and medical providers are proving that there's a better way to protect patients and doctors, all while raising the quality of our care and lowering its cost.
From the Children's Hospitals and Clinics of Minnesota to the VA hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, doctors and administrators aren't trying to cover up medical errors — They're trying to admit them. Instead of closing ranks and keeping the patient in the dark, they're investigating potential errors, apologizing if mistakes have been made, and offering a reasonable settlement that keeps the case out of court.
This program is often known as "Sorry Works," and it's led to some amazing results. When patients are treated with respect and told the truth, they sue less. More are actually compensated for their injuries, but medical providers pay less because the reward is the result of a settlement, not an expensive lawsuit. Malpractice costs for doctors go down, and health care professionals actually learn from their mistakes so they're not repeated and lives are saved.
At the VA hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, this program has reduced the average settlement to $16,000, compared with $98,000 nationwide. This ranked in the lowest quartile of all VA facilities for malpractice payouts. At the University of Michigan's hospital system, this program helped them cut their lawsuits in half and save up to $2 million in defense litigation.
The bill we're introducing today builds on these hopeful results and incorporates them into a national program. The National Medical Error Disclosure and Compensation Act, or MEDiC Act, will help reduce medical error rates and medical malpractice costs by opening the lines of communication between doctors and patients — encouraging honesty and accountability in the process.
The bill will also set up a National Patient Safety Database, which will be used to determine best practices in preventing medical errors, improving patient safety, and increasing accountability in the healthcare system.
We expect participants to see a cost savings, and we will require them to reinvest a portion of these savings into patient quality measures that will reduce medical errors. This bill also requires that some of these savings are passed along to providers in the form of lower malpractice insurance premiums.
 By Mr. CORNYN (for himself, Mr. Leahy, Mr. Hatch, and Mr. Kohl):
S. 1785. A bill to amend chapter 13 of title 17, United States Code (relating to the vessel hull design protection), to clarify the distinction between a hull and a deck, to provide factors for the determination of the protectability of a revised design, to provide guidance for assessments of substantial similarity, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary.

I was not aware my senior colleague from Illinois was going to speak so I don't want to unnecessarily hold up the entire Chamber.

Thank you very much, Mr. President. I will be brief. I know we have gone way over the time here today.
Mr. President, in the midst of so much difficulty that our Nation is facing — Katrina and Rita, the ongoing challenges in Iraq and Afghanistan — I recognize it is hard to get the public, the leadership in Congress, and senior administration officials to focus on yet one more challenge.
But as has already been stated by the Democratic leader, Harry Reid, and my senior colleague, the minority whip, Senator Dick Durbin, this is a crisis to which the entire country simply must awaken itself.
When I started talking about this 7 months ago, not too many folks paid attention. Perhaps because the shorthand for this looming crisis is the "bird flu," people assume it is just going to get birds and animals sick.
In reality, however, what is at stake here is the potential of a pandemic that we have not seen in the United States since 1918, 1919. As has already been stated here tonight, our top scientists and medical personnel, including the heads of the NIH, CDC, and the Department of Health and Human Services, all agree that it is almost inevitable that an avian flu pandemic will strike.
The key question is the extent of the damage, especially in terms of lives lost. The answer to this question will, in large measure, depend on our level of preparedness and the amount of resources we are willing to immediately commit to deal with this looming crisis.
Over the last few months, we have seen alarming reports from countries all over Asia — Indonesia, China, Vietnam, Thailand, and Russia, just to name a few — about deaths that have resulted from the avian flu.
The situation has turned so ominous that Dr. Julie Gerberding, the Director of the CDC, said that an avian flu outbreak is "the most important threat that we are facing [today]."
International health experts say that two of the three conditions for an avian flu pandemic in Southeast Asia already exist.
First, a new strain of the virus, called H5N1, has emerged, and humans have little or no immunity to it. Second, this strain has demonstrated the ability to jump between species.
The only thing preventing a full blown pandemic is a lack of efficient transmission of this strain from human to human. Once that happens, as a consequence of international travel and commerce, there is not going to be any way to effectively contain this pandemic.
Moreover, the news on this last point is not good. In recent months, the virus has been detected in mammals that have never previously been infected, including tigers, leopards and domestic cats. This suggests that the virus is mutating and could eventually emerge in a form that is readily transmittable among humans.
Mr. President, Senator Reid and Senator Durbin both outlined some of the measures that have to be put in place here domestically to protect our population. We have to drastically ramp up our stockpiles of Tamiflu, which, if taken properly, could act as a treatment from the avian flu once a person is infected. Right now, we only have a couple of million doses. We need 80 million to 100 million doses in order to be adequately prepared. That is going to cost us significant amounts of money, as the cost of Tamiflu is approximately $20 per dose.
In addition, we are going to have to develop flu vaccines of a sort we have not seen in the past. In order to create sufficient quantities, we are going to have to go push the boundaries of existing technologies and science — going beyond the agricultural mechanisms of developing vaccines that we have used in the past.
Third, we are going to make sure that local and State governments understand how urgent this is. We have to ensure there are clear plans, coordination mechanisms, and lines of authority — that will stand up in a time of crisis. Right now, we do not have sufficient plans in place to make sure local and State agencies are able to generate the kinds of rapid responses that are going to be necessary in the case of a flu outbreak.
After Katrina, I hope that local and State governments understand they have to work with the Federal agencies more effectively to deal with these kinds of emergencies.
Another issue I would mention is that we are going to have to establish international protocols to ensure we can alert ourselves rapidly if we have confirmed cases of human-to-human transmission of the avian flu anywhere in the world. Why do I mention this? If we detect efficient human-to-human transmission, it is likely that we are going to have only weeks before we are going to see those first cases in the United States.
This means placing effective trigger mechanisms in all these countries to make sure everyone is cooperating and providing rapid information, which could mean the difference in terms of tens or hundreds of thousands of lives.
Now I don't want to suggest that nothing is being done. For example, months ago, Congress, on a bipartisan basis including myself, Senator Lugar, Senator McConnell, and Senator Leahy — included $25 million as part of the Iraq supplemental to make contribute to an urgent WHO appeal on this issue. Today, this money is making a difference in the field trying to set up some of the international measures I just described.
I, along with Senators Lugar, Durbin and others, introduced legislation, S. 969, to enhance our ability to deal with this potential crisis. But that was months ago, and we need to broaden the number of people involved in this effort.
Moreover, these is are modest first steps. Going forward, we are going to need significantly more resources. I am eager to work with leaders on health issues, including Senator Harkin and Senator Reid, as well as others across the aisle.
I hope we can work not only to make sure we have an effective international regime to deal with this problem overseas but that we also invest the time, the energy, and the resources needed to put in place effective measures well before we have a full blown crisis on our hands.
An outbreak of the avian flu could occur in a year, 5 years, 10 years, or if we were incredibly lucky not happen at all. But the one good thing about investing in measures to deal with this looming crisis is — and I will end on this point — if we spend the money now, it will pay dividends, even if this particular strain of the avian flu outbreak does not occur.
Why is this the case? The risk of some sort of pandemic, and the mutations of flus for which we have no immunity, is almost inevitable. The H5N1 strain may not be the strain that leads to a full blown pandemic. But, another strain could easily come along a cause serious damage in the future.
Presently, we simply do not have the public health infrastructure to deal adequately with this contingency.
My point is this: undertaking these measures is going to be a wise investment that will help protect the lives of millions of people here in the United States and across the globe.
Mr. President, I appreciate your patience very much and look forward to working with you on this issue.

Mr. President, I thank the distinguished Senator from Alaska. I will try to be brief.
I just want to offer my strong support for the amendment Senator Harkin is going to propose and state why I think this is such an important issue.
Let me first say, that I am generally of the view that we should not be tacking on unrelated amendments to the defense bills.
The money in this legislation is badly needed by our men and women in uniform and I do not want to slow this bill down.
But, this amendment dealing with the avian flu pandemic is so important to our public health security — and our national security — so important to the lives of millions of people around the world, that it simply cannot wait. In fact, the situation is so ominous that Dr. Julie Gerberding, the Director of the CDC, said that an avian flu outbreak is "the most important threat that we are facing [today]."
In light of these developments, I believe it is worth the U.S. Senate spending just a few hours on this critical issue, even if it is not directly related to the underlying legislation.
Over the last few months, we have heard alarming reports from countries all over Asia — Indonesia, China, Vietnam, Thailand — about deaths from the avian flu.
International health experts say that two of the three conditions for an avian flu pandemic in Southeast Asia already exist. First, a new strain of the virus, called H5N1, has emerged and humans have little or no immunity. Second, this strain has shown that it can jump between species.
The last condition — the ability for the virus to travel efficiently from human to human — has not been met, and it is the only thing preventing a full blown pandemic. Once this virus mutates and can be transmitted from human to human, because of global trade and travel, we will not be able to contain this disease. We learned this lesson from SARS, which took less than 4 months to get from Asia to Canada, where it caused human and economic devastation.
When I started talking about this issue 7 months ago, many people thought that the avian flu was a mild concern, an Asian problem, an unlikely threat to Americans here in the U.S.
As time has progressed, the Nation's top scientists and experts have focused greater attention on the possibilities of an avian flu pandemic, and they have rapidly come to consensus that it is not a matter of if the pandemic will hit but when? It is not a question of whether will people die but how many? And the main question, the question that keeps me awake at night, is whether the United States will be able to deal with this calamity?
From what we have seen with the lack of readiness and dismal response to Hurricane Katrina, I think that all of us would have to conclude that the answer, at this point in time, is no.
Whether we are talking about having adequate surveillance capacities in our State and local health departments, having enough doctors and hospital beds and medical equipment for infected individuals, or having a vaccine or treatment that is guaranteed to work, I don't want to be an alarmist, but here in the U.S., we are in serious trouble.
Several of us here in the Congress — on a bipartisan basis — have taken the first steps needed to address this looming crisis. In April of this year, I introduced the AVIAN Act, S. 969 that would increase our preparedness for avian flu pandemic. Senators Lugar and Durbin and several others have cosponsored this act and I thank them for that. We need to move this bill as quickly as possible.
In May, I and Senators Lugar, McConnell, and Leahy included $25 million for avian flu activities as part of the Iraq supplemental. Today, this money is helping the World Health Organization to step up its international surveillance and response efforts.
In July, I included an additional $10 million to combat avian flu in the Foreign Operations assistance bill. That bill is currently in conference, and I hope this funding will be retained.
I am also working with Senate Defense authorizers on an amendment to require the DOD report to Congress on its efforts to prepare for pandemic influenza.
This report must address the procurement of vaccines, antivirals and other medicine; the protocols for distributing such vaccines or medicine to high priority populations; and how the DOD intends to work with other agencies, such as HHS and State, to respond to pandemic flu.
Today, with leadership by Senator Harkin, we are introducing an amendment to the DOD appropriations bill to provide $3.9 billion in emergency funds for avian flu activities. Senator Harkin has already outlined what this amendment does, so I will not rehash what he has already said.
The bottom line is that this amendment needs to be passed and passed as quickly as possible.
I know that $3.9 billion is a lot of money — especially given our fiscal situation today. But this is one issue on which we cannot be penny-wise and pound-foolish. If we don't invest the money now, this pandemic will hit America harder, more lives will be lost, and we will have to spend significantly more in resources to respond after the fact.
As we learned the hard way after Hurricane Katrina, the failure to prepare for emergencies can have devastating consequences. This nation must not be caught off guard when faced with the prospect of the avian flu. This amendment will help the Federal agencies to prepare the Nation to prevent and respond to avian flu.
America is already behind in recognizing and preparing for a potentially deadly and economically devastating avian flu pandemic that public health experts say is not a matter of if but when. We must face the reality that in this age when you can get on a plane in Bangkok and arrive in Chicago in hours, this is not a problem isolated half a world away but one that could impact us right here at home.
The need is great, and the time to act is way overdue. I urge my colleagues to vote "yes" and support this amendment.
To reiterate, Senators Lugar, McConnell, and Leahy already worked with me to include $25 million for avian flu activities as part of the Iraq supplemental. I included an additional $10 million to combat avian flu in the foreign operations assistance bill. But as Senator Harkin noted, we need much more based on the briefing we received from the administration yesterday. We have to move now on this issue. It has to be moved rapidly. We have to build an infrastructure to create vaccines and to purchase enough antiviral drugs. I strongly urge that on a bipartisan basis we make this one of our top priorities. This is a crisis waiting to happen. If we are not prepared for it now, we will all be extraordinarily sorry.
The only other comment I will make is, I know times are tough with respect to our budget. I am working with my colleagues across the aisle to figure out ways we can come up with the money for Katrina and Iraq. This is a sound investment. If we don't make this investment now, we will pay much more later.
So I hope the amendment Senator Harkin is going to offer will get bipartisan support and receive the utmost consideration from this Chamber.
Thank you very much, Mr. President.

Mr. President, I rise today to call attention to an important step towards progress for Afro-descendants in Colombia, and an important opportunity for Afro-descendants throughout Latin America.
I wish to commend the work of my colleagues in the Congressional Black Caucus on this issue, as well as the tireless efforts of nongovernmental organizations and religious groups both here and in Colombia.
This August, President Uribe of Colombia created a cabinet-level position on Afro-Colombian issues, and appointed an Afro-Colombian to fill the post. The creation of this position is especially significant because it signals both a recognition of the severity of the situation of Afro-descendants in Colombia and a willingness to address these inequalities.
At the same time, many of us recognize that this is only a first step and much more needs to be done.
I will be monitoring the progress of this office very closely in the coming months, and I especially look forward to the development of President Uribe's Committee on Civil Rights and Sustainable Development for Afro-Colombians.
It is my hope that this institution will have the resources and mandate to do an effective job of bringing some measure of equality and justice to a marginalized segment of Colombian society. It is my hope that this will encourage other governments in Latin America to consider taking additional measures to address racial discrimination, as well as economic and social marginalization, faced by Afro-descendants in their countries.
In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, our own country is being awakened to a great divide in our midst. As we struggle with troubling intersections of race and class, and how we have failed the most vulnerable members of our population, I hope we will be able to take a moment to reflect on similar struggles in places such as Colombia, Ecuador, Brazil and Venezuela.
While I realize that Colombia continues to face many challenges — from human rights to narco-trafficking — I wanted to bring some good news, that is often overlooked, about the country of Colombia to the attention of the Senate. I applaud these efforts.

