Mr. Speaker, 480,000 Federal employees are working without pay, a form of involuntary servitude; 280,000 Federal employees are not working, and they will be paid. Virtually all of these workers have mortgages to pay, children to feed, and financial obligations to meet.
Mr. Speaker, what is happening to these workers is immoral, is wrong, and must be rectified immediately. Newt Gingrich and the Republican leadership must not continue to hold the House and the American people hostage while they push their disastrous 7-year balanced budget plan. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Gingrich, and the Republican leadership must join Senator Dole and the entire Senate and pass a continuing resolution now, now to reopen Government.
Mr. Speaker, that is what the American people want, that is what they need, and that is what this body must do.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding time to me.
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is both good news and bad news. The good news is that the Republicans have finally decided to stop holding three-quarters of a million American Federal workers as hostage. In Vermont we have close to 2,000 Federal workers who are working today but are not getting paid. These people have mortgages to pay. They have children to feed. They have financial obligations to meet. It is immoral. It is wrong to hold them and every other Federal Worker who is furloughed and not being paid as hostage.
It is also wrong to hold millions of Americans who need passports, who need environmental protection, who need Meals on Wheels, who need all of the services that this Government should be providing as hostage, who have paid for these services but are not getting them.
The bad news is that, while Federal workers will be paid, many of them will not be given the resources that they need to do their jobs properly. That is insane. Why do we give people the money to go to work but then not allow them the resources to properly fulfill their function?
Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that this is not a debate about a 7-year balanced budget. If our Republican friends were serious about balancing the budget in 7 years, which I think can be done, they would not be spending $50 billion more on defense spending despite the end of the cold war. They would not be spending more money on the CIA despite the end of the cold war. They would not be giving huge tax breaks to the rich when the richest people in America today are richer than they have ever been before.

Mr. Speaker, if we want to understand why in this country the richest people are becoming richer while most working people are seeing a decline in their standard of living, if we want to understand why the Contract With America provides for huge tax breaks for the wealthiest people and the largest corporations while it cuts back massively on programs for the elderly, working people, and low-income people, we might want to examine Newt Gingrich's travel schedule for the coming week.
Mr. Gingrich will be in Seattle, WA, where he will have dinner with his colleagues and his friends for the Washington State Republican Party for $1,000 each. He will be in Dallas, TX, for a dinner for only $10,000 apiece. He will be in Dearborn, MI, for another private fireside reception at $10,000.
Who goes to these events? Most people that I know do not spend $1,000 for a dinner.

Mr. Speaker, in the United States of America millions of our citizens should not be forced into worrying about how they are going to heat their homes in this record breaking cold weather winter.
In Vermont and throughout this country we have had nights of 20 below zero, 30 below zero, and even 40 below zero.
The LIHEAP Fuel Assistance Program has provided over 24,000 Vermont households, and 6 million low-income households nationally, including many senior citizens, with the fuel assistance they need to survive the freezing weather. Three-quarters of the households on LIHEAP have incomes of less than $8,000 a year.
Today, I am sending Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Livingston a letter with over 115 congressional signatures, Democrats and Republicans, asking him to make certain that the continuing resolution that is passed by Friday contains full funding for LIHEAP — and that the remaining $200 million that was appropriated is released.
This is America, and 80-year-old senior citizens should not be forced to go cold in the winter.

Mr. Speaker, I want to offer my complete gratitude to the House of Representatives and the leadership for their support of full-funding for the Low-Income Energy Assistance Program [LIHEAP] to be allocated to States immediately. Last night I delivered the following letter to the chairman of appropriations, which was signed by 154 Members of Congress, asking for the immediate release of the $190 million remaining in fiscal year 1996 allocation for LIHEAP:
Dear Chairman Livingston: As you know there is approximately $190 million remaining in FY 1996 allocation for the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP). When a continuing resolution is developed on January 26th, we would very much appreciate your releasing 100 percent of these funds immediately. While $810 million in LIHEAP funds have been released so far this year, these funds are not even half of the LIHEAP monies allotted to the states in FY 1994 and significantly less than the $1.3 billion allocated in 

Mr. Speaker, I rise to engage in a colloquy with the chairman of the Committee on Appropriations.

Mr. Speaker, I rise to engage in a colloquy with the gentleman from Louisiana [Mr. Livingston], the chairman of the Committee on Appropriations.
As the chairman knows, I am particularly concerned with the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program. It has been very cold in my part of the country, and during earlier CR's there have been disruptions in funding for this vital program.
The administration has released $810 million to the States, but I am concerned that the flow of funds to the States could again be disrupted. Generally I would like to know whether this CR will affect the full commitment of funds to the — funds of LIHEAP — to the States. Specifically, is it the chairman's understanding that under the current bill before the House, funds for LIHEAP will be allocated to the States and be available for distribution to the States in the normal fashion?

Mr. Speaker, I was unavoidably absent during the votes on default legislation. If I had been present, I would have voted "nay" on the motions to table the appeal of the ruling of the Chair with regards to the resolutions offered by Mr. Gephardt (rollcall No. 26) and Ms. Jackson-Lee (rollcall No. 27), I would have voted "nay" on the ordering of the previous question on House Resolution 355 (rollcall No. 28). I would have voted "nay" on H. Con. Res. 141 (rollcall No. 29). I would have voted "yea" on H.R. 2924 (rollcall No. 30).

Mr. Speaker, the family dairy farmers in Vermont and throughout this country are facing disastrous financial problems. While consumer milk prices have been going up, the price that the dairy farmer receives has been going down.
Adjusted for inflation, the price Vermont dairy farmers receive has dropped 50 percent over the last 15 years. No wonder that today there are fewer than 2,000 dairy farms left in Vermont, and more and more of them are going out of business.
Tragically, none of the proposals that we were permitted to vote on during the farm bill provided for a significant increase in dairy farm income. In fact, the proposal that was passed threatens to actually lower the price that farmers receive.
Mr. Speaker, in an effort to save the family farm, the six New England States each have passed the Northeast dairy contract, which finally would provide dairy farmers a fair price for their product.
In the final Senate bill, if the final Senate bill contains the Northeast dairy compact, this House must support that provision in the conference report. To do less would be to allow New England dairy farmers to disappear.

Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, February 10, in signing the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996, the President signed into law the Missing Service Personnel Act of 1995, which had been incorporated into the authorization bill. The passage of the provisions of the Missing Service Personnel Act is a significant milestone for veterans and for the families of our MIA's, and I rise today to give credit to some of the people, including some of my fellow Vermonters, who worked hard for the passage of these provisions.
Their dedication, commitment, and persistence in the face of overwhelming odds has finally brought to fruition a matter that has been their primary concern for over 13 years. And I am very proud that my fellow Vermonters have played such a significant role in this effort.
I cosponsored the Missing Service Personnel Act of 1995 after being convinced by Patricia Sheerin, Don Amorosi, Sean McGuirl, Walt Handy, and Al Diacetis of the desperate need for this law. The act is the culmination of years of effort on the part of my fellow Vermonters — Tom Cook, Bob Jones, and Brian Lindner, the president, vice president, and chief of research, respectively, of the Northeast POW/MIA Network; and Jim Howley — and the veterans organizations who have supported it, including Vietnam Veterans of America, the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, and the Disabled American Veterans. Most notable were the contributions of the family members of the missing and prisoners: Tom Cook, Sharon Roraback, and Sarah Pendris.
Were it not for a special conference held in 1993 by the Northeast POW/MIA Network, we would not today have a law to protect missing service persons, to protect their families from exploitation, and to grant basic human rights to the missing as well as their families. Under the guidance of a former POW, Lt. Col. Orson Swindle, participants in that conference were able to clarify the goals of the proposed Missing Service Personnel Act as originally authored by John Holland. Mr. Swindle pointed a new direction: That while we cannot solve all the problems of the past, we can protect missing service persons in the future, based on what we have learned from past mistakes.
Through her courage and intuition, Vermonter Patricia Sheerin, policy analyst for the Northeast POW/MIA Network, convinced the National Vietnam Veterans Coalition to support the legislation and work for its passage. She also formed a plan and policy uniting veterans organizations and veterans advocates with the sole purpose of correcting and updating the outdated Missing Service Persons Act of 1942.
Crucial to passage of this new law was the support of citizens who were informed about its benefits. Joe and Paula Donaldson of Fair Haven, VT, deserve credit for organizing a weekly vigil as part of this educational effort. Nationwide distribution of information on the progress of the legislation, a responsibility of Bob Necci, helped pave the way to passage of this important act. Education is often the key to success, and such was the case with the Missing Service Personnel Act of 1995.
I commend the supporters of this bill for their loyalty and devotion to the men and women who wear the uniform of the U.S. Armed Forces. These Vietnam veterans and family members of those missing and captured in Vietnam have left a legacy of justice and fair treatment for future soldiers who become missing while fighting to defend our country and our freedom.

Mr. Speaker, as the only Independent in the Congress, what I would like to do is touch on a few thoughts that my Republican and Democratic colleagues often choose not to address. There are a lot of very, very important issues which Congress discusses every week, but somehow or other we seem not to talk about some of the most important issues facing the American people.
The first issue that I would like to talk about is heightened by an article which appeared in the February 5 Washington Post National Weekly edition. The article touches on an issue which I think all of us in this country should be very concerned about. That is the quality of American democracy, and to what degree we in America remain a vibrant democracy.
Mr. Speaker, all of us should be deeply concerned, no matter what our political persuasion is, that in November, 1994, when the so-called Republican revolution took place, and the gentleman from Georgia, [Mr. Gingrich] became Speaker of the House, all of 38 percent of the American people voted in that election. Sixty-two percent of the American people did not vote. The vast majority of low-income Americans did not vote. Young people in large numbers did not vote. Working people did not vote.
What does it mean, Mr. Speaker, when in Europe and in Scandinavia and in Canada and in other industrialized democracies, 60 percent, 70 percent, 80 percent of the people come out to participate in the political process, but in the United States of America, we have a major national election of great consequence and 38 percent of the American people participate? What does that mean?
I think it suggests, Mr. Speaker, that the vast majority of American people are giving up on the political process. They are hurting. They are in trouble. But they look to the Government, and they do not see a government which responds to their needs. I think what they instinctively understand is that by and large, what happens here in Congress and the decisions that we make here in Congress reflect to a very large degree the interests of the wealthy and the powerful, the people who can contribute $10,000 a plate to a Newt Gingrich-sponsored fundraising dinner; the people who contribute $16 million in one night to a Republican Party fundraising dinner.
Meanwhile, the folks back home are working longer hours for lower wages. They are concerned that they cannot afford to send their kids to college. They cannot afford health care. They are worried about the health care bills for their parents. They are deeply worried, and they look to Congress, and essentially what they see is a Congress which represents the interests of the wealthy and the powerful, and forgets about the needs of the middle class and the working people of this country.
Mr. Speaker, in the article in the Washington Post on February 5, their National Weekly edition, there is some information that they received from a national poll which should be of major concern to all Americans, regardless of their political persuasions. Let me quote a little bit from that article.
I quote: "To measure how much Americans know about politics and the political system, the Washington Post, the Kaiser Foundation, and Harvard interviewed 1,524 randomly selected adults in November and December. These Americans were asked 18 general knowledge questions about how their government works and who their leaders are. An additional 21 political knowledge questions were asked in 4 other national Washington Post polls. The surveys revealed a knowledge gap that is deep and wide." I would hope that people listen to the following paragraph.
This is based on polling by the Washington Post working with other institutions. Two-thirds of those interviewed could not name the person who serves in the U.S. House of Representatives from their congressional district. In other words, two-thirds of those polled did not know who was representing them in the House of Representatives. Half did not know whether their Representative was a Republican or a Democrat.
Then they go on, "Who is the Vice President of the United States?" Who is the Vice President of the United States? Four in ten, 40 percent of Americans surveyed, did not know or got it wrong. Forty percent of the American people did not know the name of the Vice President of the United States.
It goes on, two out of three could not name the majority leader of the U.S. Senate, Robert Dole, who will be likely a candidate for President. Nearly half, 46 percent, did not know the name of the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, Newt Gingrich, and on and on it goes.
It seems to me when 62 percent of the people do not participate in an election, when 40 percent of the people do not know the name of the Vice President of the U.S., when two-thirds of the people do not know the name of their Representative to the U.S. Congress, when many people, a majority of the people cannot name their two United States Senators, it seems to me that we have a serious problem regarding democracy in America. If we do not change the circumstances in a variety of ways, I fear very much that in the years to come we are going to lose the democracy that we have today.
Why is it that so many people do not have faith in Government, and why is it that so many people do not participate in the political process? As I said earlier, I think that has a lot to do with the belief that most people have that despite all of their problems and all of their needs, that the elections do not mean much because the people who are elected end up not representing ordinary people, but end up representing the wealthy and the powerful.
Unless we can create a political revolution in this country by which Government begins to stand up not just for those people who have huge amounts of money but for ordinary Americans, unless we can reaffirm the faith of the American people in the political process and in their Government because they see the Government responding to their needs, I fear very much that we are not going to increase voter turnout or get young people to understand what democracy is all about.
I think one of the problems that we have in this whole area is that there has been a tremendous misstatement of reality that has been going on for the last number of years by the corporately controlled media, I believe, and also by our two-party system. What has been going on is that when people turn on the television and they watch CBS or NBC, or they pick up their local newspapers, what they are hearing is the economy is booming, the economy is growing, the economy is doing very, very well.
Then the television people will tell them, well, gee, the stock market is at an all-time high. Then they will tell them corporate profits are doing very, very well this year for the major American corporations. Then they will say inflation is down and that is very good for the economy. The economy is growing and millions of new jobs are being created, all of which may be true, but it does not bear on the most important economic reality, and that is what is happening to the average American.
It is not a question of whether the stock market is soaring for the wealthy people who own most of the stocks. It is not a question of whether corporate profits are at an all-time high. The question is what is happening economically to the average American? The corporate controlled media, and I think to a large degree — there are exceptions — the two political parties represented here have not addressed that issue.
That reality is that for the average American, for the middle-class American, the economy of the United States is in a depression-like situation, and I use that word advisedly.
The reality is that since 1973, 80 percent of all American families have either seen a decline in their incomes, decline in their standard of living, or at best their incomes have remained stagnant. Now, if 80 percent of American families are seeing a decline in their standard of living, or at best economic stagnation, how can anybody with any sense of integrity talk about a growing or dynamic economy? For the middle class of America, we are in the midst of a major depression.
When I go back to Vermont, and I go back to Vermont almost every weekend, and I talk to the people throughout my State, we hold many town hearings on what is going on here in Washington. We talk to people. What do we find? I do not think Vermont, by the way, is terribly different from the rest of the country. What we find from our dairy farmers in the State of Vermont, our small farmers, they are working 60, 70, 80 hours a week. Their income is declining, and many of them are being forced off the land.
What we find is for many of our working people, they no longer work one job at 40 hours a week. Forget about that. That is ancient history. Nobody works one job at 40 hours a week. What they have to do now is work two jobs, on occasion three jobs, in order to bring home the income that their family needs to survive.
Mr. Speaker, 20 years ago American workers were the best compensated in the world, and when people would say America is No. 1, what they were talking about it that for the middle class of this country, their wages, their benefits, their pension plans, their health care, we were No. 1.
But something has happened over the last 20 years. CBS does not talk about it too much. The Speaker of the House does not talk about it too much. Most of the people in Congress do not talk about it too much. But in that 20-year period, Mr. Speaker, we went from first in the world to 13th in the world, and now our standard of living is far behind many of the countries in Europe and in Scandinavia.
One of the very interesting things that is happening, and it is a sad statement to make, is that increasingly we see European companies coming to the United States and starting factories here. There is nothing wrong with that. That is a good thing.
But why are European companies coming to the United States of America? The answer, and it really would have shocked our parents or any of us 20 or 30 years ago, they are coming to the United States today for cheap labor. They are coming to America for the same reason that American companies are going to Mexico.
In my State of Vermont we have skilled workers, hard-working people, who earn $7 an hour, who earn $8 an hour and less without benefits, who are skilled and hard-working people. You cannot get the type of labor in Europe, you cannot get that type of labor in Scandinavia, because the wages paid in those countries are much higher. So all over America, what we are seeing is companies coming to America to hire our people at low wages, minimal benefits, and I would say that that is a real tragedy that this Congress has got to address.
Mr. Speaker, adjusted for inflation, the average pay for four-fifths of American workers plummeted, declined by 16 percent, in the 20 years between 1973 and 1993. In 1973 the average American worker earned $445 a week. Twenty years later, accounting for inflation, that worker was making $373 a week.
Today the reality for the middle class of America is that they are working longer hours for lower wages. So despite what CBS or NBC or the New York Times may tell us, the reality is that for ordinary Americans, we are in the midst of a severe depression.
How many women all over this country, we hear a whole lot of discussion about family values here, and many of us believe that if a woman wants to stay home — and many women do not, and that is fine — but if a woman wants to stay home with her kids, she has the right to do that. But what we are seeing in this country now are millions of women forced to join the work force because their family cannot make it with one breadwinner, and I think that that is pretty unfortunate.
Just the other day, just last week in Burlington, VT, my hometown, I talked to a woman who said that between her and her husband they are receiving eight separate sources of income. Both of them are working different part-time jobs. They have one kid. They very rarely have a chance to have the whole family together.
That is happening all over America. Husbands do not see wives. Wives do not see husbands. Parents do not see their kids together. This is a tragedy, and it is a tragedy that the U.S. Congress must address.
Mr. Speaker, as bad as the situation is for middle-aged, middle-class workers, there is another phenomenon going around and going on that deserves a whole lot of discussion. As bad as it is for middle-aged folks, it is far, far worse for young workers, and this is pretty scary stuff.
When we ask why the average American is angry or why the average American is nervous or anxious, it is not just that he or she is working longer hours for lower wages. That is pretty bad. But they are terribly worried about what is going to happen to their kids, and I speak as somebody who has four kids.
What is happening is in the last 15 years, the wages for entry-level jobs for young men who are high school graduates has declined by 30 percent, three-zero percent. For young women it has declined by 18 percent. Wages for entry-level jobs for college graduates have also declined for men.
What about young families? Families headed by persons younger than 30 saw their inflation-adjusted median income collapse by 32 percent from 1973 to 1990. What the result of that is, is many young people are not getting married. They cannot afford to get married. Young families are not buying their own homes. They cannot afford to buy their own homes.
Most of the new jobs that are out there are not paying working people a decent wage. Very often they are in the service industry. They are flipping hamburgers at McDonald's. They are working in a ski resort. They are not jobs that are allowing people to come into the middle class.
Mr. Speaker, the dream of America, what the American dream is about, it is a dream that my parents had. My father came to this country from Poland without a nickel in his pocket and our family never had much money. But the dream of what America is about is that as parents you work hard, you are prepared to sacrifice so that your kids can do better than you did, so that your kids will have the opportunity to have the education that you never had.
I think one of the areas of anxiety and panic that so many middle-class families are feeling now is not only what is happening to them, it is the great, great worry as to what is going to happen to their kids. It is not just the kids who do not go to college. It is even the college graduates, as well.
Mr. Speaker, we are creating so many low-paying jobs that right now, Americans at the lower end of the wage scale are now the lowest paid workers in the entire industrialized world. That means if you look at what goes on in Europe, what goes on in Scandinavia, many other countries, what you are seeing now is that American workers at the low end are now, if you can believe it, the lowest paid workers in the entire industrialized world, and I think that is quite unfortunate.
Mr. Speaker, the majority of new jobs in this country today pay only $6 or $7 an hour. They offer no health care benefits. They offer no retirement benefits, and they offer no time off for vacations or sick leave. In fact, more and more of the new jobs being created are part-time jobs or temporary jobs.
In the State of Vermont, I hear from people who say, well, I have to go out and have two 20-hour jobs because the local grocery store is not hiring anybody at 40 hours anymore. They hire two people at 20 hours so that they do not have to pay benefits or provide health care or any other type of benefits that a full-time employee might receive. Many employers now consider 27 hours a week full-time jobs.
In 1993, if we can believe this, one-third of the U.S. work force was comprised of, quote-unquote, contingent labor.
The largest employer in the private sector today is not General Electric, it is not General Motors, it is Manpower Inc. So more and more of our workers are having to go out and find a job for 2 months, they are finding a job for 3 months, but they are not having any security on the job. They are not moving up the ladder. They are working for a couple of months, then they are gone, no benefits no security. Then they have to go out, and they have to hustle a new job. That causes, to say the least, a great deal of stress for the American work force.
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about why wages are in decline in the United States and why the new jobs that are being created are primarily low wage, part time temporary jobs, one of the reasons for that is the major decline in manufacturing jobs in America and the major decline in middle-level white-collar management, middle-level white collar management jobs as well.
In the past 10 years, the United States lost 3 million white-collar jobs; 1.8 million jobs in manufacturing were lost in the last 5 years alone. There is a wonderful word that is out there now in the American vocabulary, and that word is downsizing. Corporate America does not even have the guts to use the word firing any more. But they are using the word downsizing.
All over this country, in virtually every major American corporation, we are seeing massive layoffs at a time, I should mention, when corporate profits are at an all-time high.
Mr. Speaker, five companies alone, Ford, AT&T, General Electric, ITT, and Union Carbide, laid off over 800,000 American workers in the last 15 years. While decent-paying jobs continue to disappear, the number of involuntary part-time workers tripled between 1970 and 1993.
Mr. Speaker, there have been studies that have been done which have shown, if you can believe it, a correlation between the compensation that the CEO's for the largest corporations in America receive and the downsizing that they do. It appears that it is a wonderful thing to be rewarded, that the heads of AT&T and the large corporations are throwing thousands of American workers out on the street and in return what they get are very large bonus increases and salaries and very positive and beneficial stock options for them.
The more workers you can throw out into the street, the more money you make. And I think this is a very sad statement about the culture of corporate America at the present time.
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about industries, clearly one of the reason is a very simple fact: The average American today is working far harder and far more hours than was the case just 20 years ago.
Mr. Speaker, according to recent studies, the average American is now working 160 hours a year more than he or she worked in 1969, 160 hours. That is 1 month extra. That means people are now forced to work, not to bring in income, to work overtime, they are working two jobs, working three jobs, women are now forced to go out into the work force. The number of Americans working at more than one job has almost doubled over the last 15 years.
Now, it is important again to reiterate the kind of jobs that are being created. President Clinton, and President Bush before him and Reagan before him, they touted the growth of millions and millions of new jobs. Well, they are right. Millions of new jobs are being created. But what kind of jobs are they? Are they jobs that people can work at and become members of the middle class, or are they jobs that people work at and after 40 hours of work they are further behind the 8-ball than when they started?
Mr. Speaker, between 1979 and 1987, there were over 4.4 million jobs created. That is pretty good, 4.4 million jobs. And that is the information that we see in the newspapers, that we hear on television, millions of new jobs being created. That is the good news.
But what is the other side of that equation? Of that 4.4 million new jobs being created between 1979 and 1987, 3.6 million of them were at poverty-level wages. So what you are having is new jobs being created, but, unfortunately, the vast majority of them are at poverty level wages.
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, we now have the dubious distinction of being the country in which our low-wage workers are now poorer than in any other country in the industrialized world.
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, if parents and working people cannot earn a decent living, how are they going to take care of their children? And the answer is they are not.
One of the areas we should be terribly ashamed of, and I fear Republican policies are only going to make a disaster even worse, is that 22 percent of our children today live in poverty. We have by far the highest rate of childhood poverty in the industrialized world. We have some 5 million children who go hungry every single day.
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have talked for a moment, actually for more than a moment, about what is going on for the middle class and the working people of this country.
But there is another reality out there. And that is, while the middle class is shrinking, while more and more workers are receiving poverty level jobs, there is another reality that is taking place, and it is a reality that we do not talk about enough on the floor of the House, and it is a reality that we do not hear about on television, virtually at all, and that is that today, at the same time as the United States has by far the highest rate of childhood poverty in the industrialized world, we also by far have the most unequal distribution of wealth in the industrialized world.
I know we are not supposed to talk about that. That is something that is kind of a little bit dirty, and we are not supposed to talk about that here in the Congress. But the reality is the wealthiest 1 percent of the population in America own over 40 percent of the wealth of America. They own more wealth than the bottom 90 percent.
Further, in terms of income distribution, that means what people are earning every year, the highest earning 4 percent make more money than do the bottom 51 percent. Prof. Edward N. Wolf, who is a professor at New York University, concluded the most recent study of America's concentration of wealth by saying, and I quote--
We are the most unequal industrialized country in terms of income and wealth, and we are growing more unequal faster than the other industrialized countries.
You know, I think it is appropriate every now and then that we talk about things like justice, like decency, terms we do not hear too much on the floor of the House. We have got to ask ourselves some basic questions: Is it just, is it right, that the wealthiest 1 percent of the population in America owns more wealth than the bottom 90 percent? Is it appropriate to be seeing in our economy today a significant increase in millionaires and people on top, while at the same time more and more people are forced to work for poverty level jobs?
Mr. Speaker, during the 1980's, the wealthiest 1 percent of families saw their incomes rise by 80 percent. So, for the people on the top, the economy is doing fantastically. In the same decade, the 1980's, the bottom 90 percent of families saw their income rise only 3 percent. Most people saw a decline in their standard of living. No wonder that the richest 1 million families today own more than 84 million middle-class working and poor families put together.
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about economic growth, all of us are in favor of economic growth. But there is something wrong when the vast majority of that income growth goes to the people on the top, the people who make $200,000, $300,000, $400,000 a year; meanwhile the middle class is shrinking, people work longer hours for lower wages, and the jobs available to millions of working Americans pay $5 an hour or $6 an hour.
Mr. Speaker, there is another issue that really needs to be addressed because I think it really smacks of obscenity, and that is that in 1980 the average CEO in America, the corporate, the chief executive officer of a major corporation, that CEO earned 42 times what the average factory worker earned.
Today, according to recent reports, the CEO's of the major corporations are now earning 200 times what their average worker is earning.
Just this last year, a report that I saw indicated that the compensation, that is, salaries, bonuses, stock options for the major CEO's went up by over 23 percent. Meanwhile, workers were getting 2 or 3 percent increases in their income.
I think ultimately we have to ask ourselves whether the CEO's of the largest corporations need to eat 200 times more than their workers, need to spend 200 times more for education for their kids than the average middle-class person, should have 200 times more income, to take care of their health care needs of their parents than the average middle-class person.
I think we have got to bring the issue of justice back home again and say to the CEO's of the major American corporations, the people who are downsizing all over this country despite recordbreaking profit, the people who are taking our jobs to Mexico and to China, it is wrong, it is wrong for you to be earning 200 times what your workers are earning. It is your workers who have created wealth in your company, and you have got to have a little bit of decency, and you have got to share it, and you cannot gobble it up all for yourselves and your families. There is a limit to the number of automobiles you can have, a limit to the number of cars you can have, the working people of this country, the middle class of this country, they also have a right to have health care for their kids and their parents, they also have a right maybe to go on a vacation every once in a while, they have a right to send their kids to college also.
The fact that we have such a grotesquely unfair distribution of wealth and incomes is an issue that this Congress must address, and it has to address.
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that has been discussed a great deal lately is taxation. Taxation, everybody wants tax reform. I would just simply point out that, according to a study conducted by the House Committee on Ways and Means, the top 1 percent of taxpayers saved an average of $41,000 in 1992 over what their taxes would have been at 1977 rates. In other words, one of the scandals that we have seen is the result of the tax reforms of 1977, 1981, and 1986 is a major cutback in the tax rates of the largest, the wealthiest people in America, and the largest corporations.
In fact, in 1977, if Federal 1977 individual tax rates had still been in effect in 1992, the Nation's wealthiest top 1 percent would have paid $83.7 billion more in taxes which is about one-half of the Federal deficit today.
So, maybe Mr. Gingrich and his friends would not have had to propose slashing Medicare, Medicaid, education, environmental protection, veterans' programs, the needs of our littlest kids, maybe they would not have had to propose that the wealthiest 1 percent of our people, whose incomes are soaring, had paid, were able to pay, had paid their fair share of taxes.
Mr. Speaker, let me chat for a moment about some suggestions that I and other Members of Congress are making. I am the chairman of the House Progressive Caucus, which now has 51 members, and the Progressive Caucus has been attempting to lead the effort, with success, against the disastrous policies of the Contract With America and Mr. Gingrich's Republican Party.
But more than that, we are attempting to come up with sensible solutions that would allow the middle class of this country to expand, to grow, rather than to see it shrink. So let me, if I might, just suggest six or seven areas that I think this country and this Congress should been moving forward in.
Mr. Speaker, given the fact that most of the new jobs that are being created are low wage jobs, many of them are part-time jobs, many of them are temporary jobs, this Congress must raise the minimum wage. In my view it should be raised to at least $5.50 an hour.
Mr. Speaker, the current minimum wage of $4.25 an hour is in terms of purchasing power 26 percent less than it was 20 years ago. In other words, our minimum wage workers today are far poorer than was the case 20 years ago.
Mr. Speaker, we hear a whole lot of discussion about welfare reform and the need for people to go out and work. I believe that. But I believe that, if somebody works 40 hours a week, they are entitled to live above poverty. I do not think that people are making it at $4.25, $4.50, or $5 an hour without benefits. You cannot raise kids on those wages.
So I think that, given the fact that the minimum wage in terms of purchasing power has declined by 26 percent over the last 20 years, we have got to have the courage to raise the minimum wage. In my view it should be raised to at least $5.50 an hour.
What is happening around this country because of the failure of Congress to act, a number of States, including the State of Vermont, are themselves trying unilaterally to raise the minimum wage. I applaud that matter. But the truth of the matter is the best way for it to be done, it should be done in 50 States in America, not in 5, not in 10. Let us do that. Let us raise the minimum wage here in Congress to at least $5.50 an hour.
Mr. Speaker, the second area that I think we need to take a hard look at is creating jobs right here in America rather than continuing to defend Europe and Asia against a nonexistent enemy. Many taxpayers may not know this, but our Government continues to spend about $100 billion a year defending Europe and Asia against whom we are not quite sure. It seems to me we should take that $100 billion, being it back home to rebuild both the physical and human infrastructure of the United States of America.
Mr. Speaker, we can put a heck of a lot of people back to work doing meaningful work, rebuilding our roads, our mass transportation, our bridges, our schools, our libraries. In terms of human needs, we can save a whole lot of misery by hiring qualified people in terms of disease prevention, getting people out, working against smoking, against teenage pregnancy, against AIDS.
We can save a lot of lives by having people going out into our communities. We should be putting more money into Head Start, not less money; hiring more people for child care, not cutting back on those important areas.
So it seems to me that, rather than spending $100 billion a year defending Europe and Asia, bring the money back home, put our people to work, making the country a richer country, improving our physical and human infrastructure.
Mr. Speaker, there is another area that needs to be discussed which gets relatively little discussion on this floor, and that is our current trade policy. In my view, our current trade policy is a disaster. I think that, sadly, tragically, all of us in the House who stood up and said "NAFTA was not going to work," unfortunately, we were proven right.
What we have seen is many tens of thousands of American jobs lost to NAFTA. We have seen a trade deficit grow with Mexico. We have learned that the Mexican Government lied to us about the state of their economy. They devalued their peso which necessitated President Clinton to propose a $50 billion bailout loan guarantee for Mexico, which many of us opposed. I brought forth legislation on the floor of this House which would have forced the President to come to Congress before lending Mexico any more money as part of the bailout. Unfortunately, that did not get through the Senate.
But it is not just NAFTA and it is not just GATT, it is our entire trade policy. This year the United States will have a trade deficit of about $160 billion. People say, so what? What does it mean to me? I don't care.
Let me tell you what it means to you. The economists estimate that, if a company were to develop a plant in the United States that produced $1 billion of export, exported $1 billion on product, on average, that company would be hiring 20,000 American workers at decent wages. What that means is when you have a $160 billion trade deficit, when you are importing $160 billion more in goods and services than you are exporting, that equates to the loss of 3 million decent jobs.
Mr. Speaker, just this last weekend I was at a mall in Vermont. I was just looking around at the goods that were available and went into one of the stores where they were selling televisions and VCR's, went into another store selling clothing. I would urge Americans to do that and take a look at the labels as to where these products are made. Increasingly what you see is: Made in China, made in Malaysia, made in Mexico, made in El Salvador.
What is going on is that major American corporations have basically deserted the United States of America, taken their factories to very desperate Third World countries where people have to work for horrible wages.
I remember several years ago going to Mexico as part of the NAFTA debate, and going into a factory there where it was a very state-of-the-art factory, a very sophisticated modern factory. Most of the people there were women who were hard-working, good people. They were earning $1 an hour. We left the plant and walked a quarter of a mile down the road to see where the folks were living. Where they were living was in shacks, often without running water, often without electricity.
Even worse, as bad as the economic situation is in Mexico, it is, of course, worse in China. When our friends at the Nike sneaker company or the other major sneaker companies leave the United States and go to set up their plants in China, what they are doing there is hiring workers at 20 cents an hour; 20 cents an hour.
So what you are doing, it is a worthy exercise. Take a walk through the mall and see where products are manufactured. Increasingly where you are going to see these products manufactured is in desperate Third World countries.
Mr. Speaker, whenever we have a war, our multinational corporations become very patriotic and tell us how much they love America and how much they support the young men and women who are prepared to put their lives on the line defending America. They have big parades and are just ever so patriotic.
I hope very much that the CEO's of the major American corporations would begin to show us their love of this country and patriotism by maybe not running to China and Mexico, but reinvesting back home here in the United States of America.
I think this is an issue I know that the Progressive Caucus and other Members of Congress are prepared to address. It makes zero sense to me, Mr. Speaker, that we continue to give huge tax breaks to large corporations who are downsizing their work force, despite record breaking profits, who are taking our jobs to Mexico and China. It seems to me those are not the companies that should be receiving major tax breaks.
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, it seems wrong to me that, given the fact that the U.S. Government is the largest purchaser of goods and services in the entire world, not just military, but many, many products, that we should begin to think about preferential treatment for those companies, and there are many of these companies who are reinvesting in their communities, who are hiring American workers at decent wages.
We have got to take a hard look at this issue. We have got to give support to those American companies that are doing the right thing. And they are out there. They are treating their workers with respect and with dignity. They are showing us their patriotism, because they are not running to Mexico or China, but they are supporting their communities, the communities that made them money in the first place.
So I think, Mr. Speaker, we have got to take a fundamental look at our entire trade policy. Do we build a wall around America? No. Do we think that trade is a bad thing? No. Trade is a very good thing. But we want to develop a trade policy which allows us to export roughly as much as we import.
We want to have the option of purchasing foreign products. There is nothing wrong with that. But we need a trade policy which puts Americans to work building the goods that we can build so well. Our workers are second to none in the world, if they are given the chance. But the truth of the matter is, we do not talk about it too often, but corporate America is selling out the middle class and working class of this country when they run to China and they run to Mexico. We need a series of policies to get those companies to reinvest here in the United States of America.
Mr. Speaker, there is another issue which I am working on, which some other Members of Congress are working on, that needs to be addressed, and that is that when we try to understand why the standard of living of working people has declined, when we try to understand why the middle class is shrinking, it is important to understand the correlation between the decline of the standard of living of working people and the decline in the trade union movement in America.
It seems to me that if working people are going to get justice, if working people are going to earn decent wages at the place that they work at, if working people are going to get decent representation here in Washington or in their State capitals, it is important for the U.S. Congress to develop policies which allow working people to join unions, if that is what they want to do.
Mr. Speaker, there are a whole lot of workers who do not want to join a union, and that is their right. No question about it. But in my view, and I think the studies indicate this, there are millions of working people who want to join unions, who understand that workers who are in unions earn significantly more than nonunion workers.
The problem right now is that the deck is very much stacked against workers who want to join unions. Despite the law, which is routinely ignored by company after company, those workers who are trying to form a union are fired, they are laid off, they are disciplined. Workers are terrified they are going to lose their jobs. Companies threaten workers that they are going to go to Mexico or shut down the whole place if a union comes.
It seems to me if we are interested in raising income for the working and middle class, we need major labor law reform. The essence of that labor law reform must be that if 50 percent of the workers in a shop vote to join a union, plus one, they have a union. We need legislation that compels the company to sit down and negotiate in a serious way with those workers.
Too often in America, after workers go through all the blood, sweat, and tears of forming a union, they sit down to negotiate their first contract, and the owners refuse to negotiate in good faith and they drag it on and on and the union gets lost. It seems to me that should be illegal. An owner should negotiate in good faith with a union, and if the company does not do that, disciplinary action is taken against that company.
Mr. Speaker, another issue that I think needs to be addressed that is an issue that we hear very, very little discussion about on the floor of this House now, which is the crisis in health care. Many of us right now are, of course, preoccupied fighting against Gingrich's massive cuts to Medicare and Medicaid and other health care programs.
What we are trying to do is see that these cuts do not take place, to see that elderly people do not have to pay double the premiums that they are paying today in 7 years, that we do not see massive cutbacks to hospital, general rural hospitals in particular, which might close down hospitals.
In terms of the cuts in Medicaid, we do not know what will happen to the elderly people who need nursing homes, who will not be guaranteed nursing home care. We do not know what will happen to the middle-class families who today can see their parents taken care of well in a nursing home through Medicaid, but will no longer have that guarantee that that will take place. So while we are fighting those terrible cuts, we must not lose track of the real need for fundamental health care reform in America.
When we talk about health care, we have got to understand several basic facts. No. 1, the health care crisis today is worse than it was 3 years ago when we had this big debate on health care. It is not better, it is worse. Today, over 40 million Americans have zero health insurance. More than that have inadequate health insurance. These are the people with very high deductibles. They do not go to the doctor because they cannot afford the deductible, they cannot afford the copayment.
Furthermore, what we have got to understand is that despite the fact that 40 million Americans have no health insurance and so many people are under insured, that the United States today continues to spend far more per capita on health care than does any other major industrialized nation on Earth.
We are spending more for a terribly bureaucratic and wasteful system that rewards the insurance companies with huge profits, that pays the CEO's of the major insurance companies huge salaries, that rewards certain doctors with huge incomes, that allows our pharmaceutical companies to charge our people in America far more for the same product that they sell in Europe, or in Canada, or in Mexico. So I think we have got to move toward a simple, nonbureaucratic health care system which guarantees health care to every American. That is what our vision must be when we talk about family values. What we must be saying is that every family in America knows that they will be able to go to the doctor of their choice without worrying that they are going to go bankrupt.
So, Mr. Speaker, while we continue the fight against these disastrous cuts in Medicare and Medicaid, we must hold out the vision for a single-payer, State-administered health care system which guarantees health care to all people, and in fact we can guarantee health care to people, to every man, woman, and child in America, and we can spend less than we are right now with our wasteful, and bureaucratic, and inadequate system.
Mr. Speaker, I think the last point that I want to touch on has to do with campaign finance and election reform, and that is, as I think many Americans understand, it is not a level playing field in terms of what goes on here. We have our freshman Republican class who are revolutionaries, and they certainly are. Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, they have broken all of the records from any other class in the history of Congress in raising corporate PAC money. The biggest corporations; that is pretty revolutionary, I suppose, getting far more than any other class has received.
Mr. Speaker, 29 percent of the members of the United States are millionaires. My understanding is 25 percent of the freshman Republican class are millionaires, millionaires, and it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if we do not want to convert the House of Representatives, the people's body, into a House of Lords, we need some pretty fundamental campaign finance reform which takes away the ability of big money interests to continue to dominate what goes on here in the Congress.
Let me just briefly touch upon some of the issues that I think must be addressed in any serious campaign finance reform legislation.
No. 1, we have got to revisit the issue of very, very wealthy people being able to buy elections. I have nothing personally against Steve Forbes, or Ross Perot, or anybody else, so it is not a personal criticism of them. But I really think it is unfair that people who are just born or perhaps made hundreds and hundreds and millions of dollars, that they have the freedom to get up and say, well, you know, getting boring, you know, middle age, tired of my business career. I think that I am going to run for the President of the United States. Why not? Let us take out $25 million, $50 million out of the old checking account. No problem. We are worth a billion dollars, we are worth a half a billion dollars, and guess what? We will break the monotony. We will run for the President of the United States. Gee, that must be a lot of fun.
So I have nothing against Steve Forbes or Ross Perot; they are fine people. But I think that we have got to create a situation in which every American has the ability, should be able to run for President of the United States, should be able to run for the Senate, should be able to run for the House, should be able to run for Governor, and not just millionaires. And what we are seeing is not just on the presidential level. Do not kid yourself. More and more people who are running for the United States Senate or running for the United States House of Representatives are millionaires. The leadership of both parties is soliciting those people. It is pretty easy. You do not have to worry about raising funds for these guys. They are millionaires; they will pay for it themselves.
And we are seeing this also not only here in Washington, you are seeing it in State capitals as well. Millionaires, you know, became Governor of Louisiana not so long ago, and that is the pattern.
Is that what we want for America? Is that what people fought and died for, to defend democracy for, that we end up having people with huge amounts of money running the government? I do not think so. I do not think that is right.
So I think we want to revisit Butler versus Valeo, the very wrong-headed Supreme Court decision which basically said, gee, millionaires and billionaires have a constitutional right, a freedom of expression, to buy elections. I think that is wrong, and I think through a constitutional amendment or perhaps rethinking on the part of the Supreme Court we have got to revisit that issue. Wealthy people should not be able to buy elections.
Second of all, if we are talking about fairness and elections, the most important issue is to limit the amount of money that can be spent in an election, and we can argue whether for a House race that should be $400,000, $500,000, or $600,000, but that is the most important thing. If somebody has $2 million, somebody has a hundred thousand dollars, the guy with the $2 million is going to win the vast majority of the time, no matter how good or bad that person may be. So we want to limit the amount of money that can be spent.
And third, we want to make sure that the money itself is not coming from wealthy, powerful interests, but from ordinary people, and I think what we probably want to do is have a combination of small contributions balanced off against public funding of elections so we do not have to have spectacles of the Republican National Committee, I guess it was, holding a fundraiser in Washington, DC, and on one night raising $16 million, and Mr. Gingrich going around the country at $10,000 a plate fundraisers, and in fairness it is Republicans who do this; the Democrats do it as well. And I think we want to end that type of politics.
Mr. Speaker, I would simply conclude my remarks by suggesting that this country faces some serious problems; there is no question about that. But I think those problems are solvable. I do not think there is anything that I have discussed today, the lack of a national health care system, decent wages for our middle class growing out between the rich and the poor. I think those problems are solvable. But I want to say this. Those problems are not going to be solved if tens of millions of American people continue to turn off to the political system. People fought and died to continue this country as a democracy, and we are insulting those people when we say, oh, politics, hey that is all crap, they are all crooks, I am not going to get involved. Wrong.
And I want to say this also; that there are people in Congress and in government who really do not want ordinary Americans to vote and to participate in the political process because, if you only have a small number of people who are voting, as in the last election where we had 38 percent of the people, then big money can dominate what goes on if ordinary people in the middle class do not participate.
So let me simply conclude by saying this country has serious problems, but they are solvable problems. We can create policies by which the middle class will expand rather than shrink. We can create policies by which we do not have $160 billion a year trade deficit. We can create policies which move us toward a balanced budget in a fair way, by dealing with corporate welfare and defense spending rather than slashing Medicare and Medicaid. We can improve education in this country and make college affordable for every middle-class and working-class young person. We do not have to continue to have, by far, the highest rate of childhood poverty in the industrialized world. We can address those issues. But we will not address those issues unless ordinary people begin to stand up, and fight back, and make the effort to reclaim this government which belongs to them. It does not simply belong to the millionaires and billionaires who have used this government for their own interests. It belongs to ordinary Americans, middle class and the working people of this country.
So I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we can see a reinvigoration of democracy in this country, serious political debate about how we can improve life for the vast majority of our people. That is my hope, and I think if people do that, we are going to see some really good changes in this country.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding me this time.
I would like to begin by thanking the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Gekas] and the chairman of the full Committee on the Judiciary, the gentleman from Illinois [Mr. Hyde], for their assistance in ensuring this joint resolution was passed by the Committee on the Judiciary and placed on the Suspension Calendar in a timely manner. We very much appreciate their willingness to move this matter along so rapidly.
Mr. Speaker, passage of this legislation is very important to the residents of Guildhall, VT. The Vermont-New Hampshire public water supply compact is noncontroversial but it is essential. Passage will allow Guildhall to pay its debt to New Hampshire and will allow the village of Guildhall to update its water transmission lines and provide adequate water services — including fire protection — to its residents. Right now, only one fire hydrant serves the village of Guildhall, and more are needed.
Mr. Speaker, Vermonters take pride in meeting their environmental obligations and this will allow the town of Guildhall to meet requirements under the Clean Water Act. And, if this bill passes under suspension today, Guildhall can start upgrading its water transmission lines and provide improved fire protection on schedule. I urge immediate approval of this resolution.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding me the time.
Mr. Speaker, more women in the United States are injured and killed through domestic violence than by automobile accidents, muggings, and rapes by strangers combined. Domestic violence is a terrible plague in American society.
Given that reality, it is an absolute outrage that a number of insurance companies deny health insurance to women who have been battered and who have been victims of domestic violence. These insurance companies argue that domestic violence is a preexisting condition and that it might not be profitable for them to insure these women. Under these conditions women are being abused twice, first by their batterers and, secondly, by the insurance companies who refuse to insure them and their families.
Mr. Speaker, I am delighted that both the Republican and Democratic health care bills before us tonight include an amendment which I offered which would once and for all put an end to this outrage. Women who are battered are entitled to health insurance just like anyone else.

Included both in the Republican bill and the Dingell bill as well, yes.

Mr. Speaker, all over this country, family farms have been disappearing in great numbers as a result of the failure of our current agricultural policy. In Vermont, in 1977, we had 3,300 farms. Today we have less than 2,000. All over the country this is happening. This is an American tragedy.
In 1989, some people in New England got together to figure out how we could save the family farm in our region, and they came up with a concept called the Northeast Dairy Compact. This compact could provide dairy farmers in New England finally with a fair price for their product, a fair price which they are not getting today. It is an opportunity to save the family farm. All six legislatures in New England overwhelmingly approved the compact; all six Governors, liberal and conservatives, approved the compact.
Mr. Speaker, originally when we voted on the bill, the compact was not in the farm bill, but today it is in the farm bill as a result of the work the conferees did. Mr. Speaker, the Northeast Dairy Compact could become a model for farms all over this country for regions all over this country. It is good for New England. It is good for America.
There is a lot in this bill that I do not support, but I certainly fervently support the Northeast Dairy Compact section.

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about disturbing trends in contemporary health care, and to discuss H.R. 3222, The Hippocratic Oath and Patient Protection Act of 1996, which I introduced to halt those trends and protect strong doctor-patient relationships.
Mr. Speaker, more and more doctors and patients are enrolled with managed care and HMO's. The Wall Street Journal reports on the financial success of HMO's by stating it has left them "so awash in cash they don't know what to do with it all."
U.S. Healthcare, for example, is a major, corporate HMO with 2.4 million members. It makes $1 million a day in profits. Is CEO, Leonard Abramson, walked away from his company's recent merger with Aetna with a personal profit of nearly $1 billion.
Clearly, there is a built-in conflict between a for-profit HMO and the needs of a patient. The less money spent on providing care for the patient, the more money the company makes. It's that simple.
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we must all work to control health care costs. However, we must also ensure that health care decisions are made by doctors using medical rationale with their patients' interests at heart, not insurance administrators using financial spreadsheets with their own economic interests at heart. And most importantly, we must preserve the fundamental core of successful health care — the strong doctor-patient relationship.
Unfortunately, with the growth of managed care and the power of large insurance companies, serious problems are developing which, in my view, threaten the doctor-patient relationship.
Many HMO's use what are essentially "free-for-denying-service" systems, which pay doctors for denying care and penalize them for providing it. Doctors under some plans lose up to 50 cents of compensation for every dollar they order spent on emergency care. And according to a Mathematica Policy Research study, 60 percent of managed care plans in this country currently place their providers at some financial risk for the cost of patient care. This places doctors in very difficult situations, as they are asked to base their decisions on criteria that is contrary to what they were taught and swore to uphold.
You would have to be patently insane to sign on with an HMO you know is going to pay your doctor not to treat you. So some insurance companies are taking steps to make sure you don't know what they are doing. They keep their incentive plans secret from their customers, and in many cases keep both patients and doctors in the dark about the formulas used to approve or deny coverage. Therefore, doctors and consumers signing on do not know what they are getting themselves into, and insurers are free to make arbitrary decisions without outside scrutiny.
Further, many HMO contracts contain blatant gag rules that tell doctors what they can and cannot say to their patients. Last year, for example, Kaiser Permanente of Ohio told its doctors not to discuss any possible treatments with patients before checking with the company's consultants.
These outrageous clauses strike at the heart of informed consent and health care ethics — someone considering an operation should have all the relevant information to make their decision, and doctors must be able to provide that information.
These problems are serious enough that Massachusetts has already passed a law banning gag rules, while New York and several other State legislatures are considering bills to deal with these issues. Before recess, I introduced legislation that will take three steps to preserve strong doctor-patient relationships. My bill has already been endorsed by Consumers Union, the American Nurses Association, the Vermont Psychological Association, the American Psychological Association, the National Medical Association, and the Gray Panthers.
First, my legislation will ban outright incentives to deny appropriate care, and ensure safeguards are installed so doctors are not placed at substantial financial risk for patient care.
Second, my bill prohibits gag rules and other interference in doctors' communications regarding patient care. It is the only legislation that safeguards doctors' communications with their colleagues and the public as well as their patients.
Third, to ensure neither doctors nor patients are kept in the dark about what their insurer is doing, my legislation provides for open, honest discussion of practices key to patient care by requiring disclosure of utilization review procedures, financial incentives for providers, and all services and benefits offered under the health plan.
That disclosure may be half the battle, because I think no insurance executive will be willing to stand up and defend these outrageous practices once they are out in the open.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding me the time.
Mr. Speaker, the gentleman is right. The minimum wage should have been raised 2 years ago, and I had a bill in to raise it to $5.50 an hour. But the fact that it was not raised then makes it more imperative that we raise it now because the purchasing power of low-wage workers has declined even more. So let us move forward today and pass a minimum wage.

Mr. Speaker, the major crisis facing our country is that more and more we are becoming a low-wage society. During the last 20 years, the real wages of American workers have declined by 16 percent, and more tragically for our young workers, the new jobs that they are getting are paying even lower wages than was the case 15 years ago.
Mr. Speaker, what is also grossly unfair is that while the vast majority of the working people become poorer, the people on top become richer, and we now have by far the most unequal distribution of wealth and income in the industrialized world. If people work 40 hours a week, they should not live in poverty. A $4.25 minimum wage is a disgrace.
Let us have the courage to do the decent thing, the right thing. Let us raise the minimum wage now. Bring that legislation to the floor.

Mr. Speaker, this debate centers on two issues. At a time when the gap between the rich and the poor is growing wider, when the real wages of American workers has declined by 16 percent over the last 20 years, when most of the new jobs being created are low wage jobs, part-time jobs, temporary jobs, we must raise the minimum wage so that, if somebody works 40 hours a week, they do not live in poverty.
Second, given the struggle that so many working poor are experiencing today, why would anybody want to raise the rents that low-income people have to pay in public housing? Why would somebody tell the elderly poor, who are barely surviving on Social Security, that they must pay higher rents than they are paying today? This is a bad rule. Let us defeat it.

Mr. Chairman, I want to make two basic points.
First of all, one of the great crises in America today is that millions and millions of low income and working people are spending 40, 50, 60 yes, 70 percent of their limited incomes on housing. Therefore, they just do not have the money available for the food they need, for the transportation they need and maybe to put away a few bucks for educational opportunities for their kids. That is a real crisis.
The second point that I would make is to try to put this discussion in human terms. I called up a housing authority, senior citizen housing authority in Vermont this morning. They told me that many of the seniors in the housing earn $8,000 a year on average from Social Security. Right now they are paying 30 percent of their income for rent, $2,400 a year.
Mr. Chairman, if this proposal that is in the bill goes through, what could very easily happen is that senior citizens bringing in $8,000 a year will now pay 40 percent of their income in housing. That is an additional $800 a year, when you are bringing in $8,000 a year. Ten percent of all of your income more now goes for housing.
Second of all, if their Medicare proposals go into effect and we raise the Medicare premiums for senior citizens, in a few years time we will be talking about those same seniors paying $500 a year more for Medicare premiums; $800 plus $500, $1,300 a year more on a senior citizen earning $8,000 a year on Social Security.
Meanwhile, we are talking about huge tax breaks for the wealthiest peole in America. Mr. Chairman, this proposal in the bill is unfair. It constitutes a war against many senior citizens.

Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.

Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chairman, let me begin by thanking the Republican leadership here, because my understanding is that they will be accepting this amendment. In truth, this is a tripartisan amendment. It has support from the gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema] and other Republicans, as well as many Democrats.
Mr. Chairman, many Members of Congress have criticized public housing and believe that Americans should be able to decide for themselves how best to spend their housing allowance. These critics should be supporters of the Section 8 program, but this laudable program is not reaching everyone that is eligible for assistance.
About 1.5 million people receive section 8 assistance, but close to that same amount are on the waiting list. In my home State of Vermont, the waiting list is over 3 years long. In some areas, applicants wait for more than 10 years.
Unfortunately, this bill contains a provision that would make these waiting periods even longer. I am talking about the major cuts in fees for administering the Section 8 program. If the bill had been in place for fiscal year 1996, housing authorities would have received, on average, 23 percent less to administer the tenant-based Section 8 program. Nationally, according to HUD, we are talking about a $182 million cut in section 8 administration.
In California alone, that cut amounts to almost $30 million; in New York, over $21 million; and in New Jersey, over $7 million. In my small State of Vermont, we would lose $318,000.
Mr. Chairman, the simple fact of the matter is that this cut goes far too deep. If we believe in section 8 housing, then we must allocate enough money for the program to be administered effectively. Otherwise, we are killing this program through a backdoor method and I do not think that that is what the majority of Members want to do.
There is widespread support for section 8, and I do not believe that anyone really wants to hurt it. This bill provides for a two-tier formula where public housing authorities get a fee based on 6.5 percent of fair market value for the first 600 units and 6 percent of fair market value for the rest.
Mr. Chairman, this is a huge cut from the fiscal year 1995 and fiscal year 1996, when fees were based on 8.2 percent of fair market value. HUD estimates that over 90 percent of the agencies that administer Section 8 housing will lose more than 15 percent of their administrative funds. On average, it will be an estimated 23-percent cut per agency.
Mr. Chairman, I am offering a compromise amendment that puts the fee level about halfway in between where the funds are today and where they would be under the provisions of the bill. The two-tiered formula would remain, but the 6 percent number would be raised to 7 percent and the 6.5 percent number would be raised to 7.65. It is a compromise between the 8.2 percent formula used today and the 6 and 6.5 percent levels recommended in the bill.
Mr. Chairman, I should point out that that is the formula recommended by HUD and HUD supports this amendment. The National Association of Housing and Redevelopment Officials are also strong supporters of this amendment.
Frankly, Mr. Chairman, many of us had believed that this amendment was going to be accepted as part of the manager's amendment and we were surprised that it was not. If it is adopted, fees would still be cut an estimated 10.5 percent. That is a big cut. That is a major cut. But it would not devastate the administration of the program as the proposed cuts do. This is a compromise position, and my hope is that it would be supported by all Members.
Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by stating that every State in the country is severely affected by the provisions stated in this bill. It provides for an estimated 23 percent cut in Section 8 administrative fees. That is much too high.
Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues to please support the compromise position and vote "yes."
Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.

Mr. Chairman, I urge the passage of this amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time.
The CHAIRMAN. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders].

Mr. Speaker, this is really an incredible rule. What we have been hearing for the last year and what we will be hearing shortly is that the leadership here in the Congress thinks that we should make savage cuts in Medicare, force elderly people who do not have the money to pay more for premiums. Meanwhile, they are suggesting that we spend $13 billion more for the military than the President wants. Do not you think the American people are entitled to that debate on priorities? The Republican majority wants to savage Medicaid; 88 million people will no longer have health insurance. Children will be without health insurance. Elderly people will be unable to pay for their prescription drugs.
Mr. Speaker, I ask, "Don't you think we should have a debate as to whether or not we cut military spending, or we salvage Medicaid?"
I think the American people want that debate.
Maybe they will agree with our colleagues. Maybe they think we should spend more money on star wars and B-2 bombers and less money on health care; maybe our colleagues are right. I do not think they are. But I think that is a debate that we should have.
Mr. Speaker, all over America, middle-class families are desperate. In Vermont they are knocking their brains out trying to figure out how they can afford to send their kids to college. Meanwhile the Republican leadership is cutting back on loans and grants.
I think the American people, the middle class of this country, has a right to decide whether we put more money into education or whether we continue to spend a hundred billion dollars a year defending Europe and Asia against a nonexistent enemy.
Mr. Speaker, some of the cuts that have been advocated here by the Republican leadership are cruel, they are unnecessary. It seems to me that before we go after nutrition programs for children, we take a hard look at the military budget. We have a right to have that debate.
Defeat this rule.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, let me begin by expressing my disappointment at the vote that took place in the House today regarding the defense budget. It seems to me that in a time when Speaker Gingrich and his colleagues are talking about the need to move this country toward a balanced budget and are talking about the crisis of our deficit situation, that it makes no sense for the Republican leadership to be proposing a defense budget which is $13 billion more than President Clinton has request.
I find it especially hypocritical that at a time when the Republican leadership is saying that we have got to balance the budget and to do so we must make major cuts in Medicare, major cuts in Medicaid, major cuts in education and veterans' programs and environmental protection, in the fuel assistance program, and so many programs that the middle class and the working class of this country depend upon, low-income people depend upon that at the same time Mr. Gingrich says, well, it is OK that we spend billions more for B-2 bombers that the Pentagon does not want, that we start spending billions of dollars more for the star wars program.
The budget of the U.S. Government is what this country is all about, and I think it is a sad day that we are saying that it is appropriate to spend billions more on the military, despite the end of the cold war, that we are prepared to put approximately $100 billion into defending Europe and Asia, although we do not even know who the enemy is now, but we do not have enough money to take care of our senior citizens who are in need, we do not have enough money to take care of our children.
This country has by far the highest rate of childhood poverty in the industrialized world, 22 percent of our kids in poverty. We do not have enough money to help them. We do have enough money to build B-2 bombers and star wars and things that the Pentagon does not even want. I think that is a very sad state of priorities that Mr. Gingrich and the Republican leadership are expressing.
Mr. Speaker, what I want to concentrate on today is what I think is the most important issue facing this country, and that is the state of our economy and my very great fears that this country, in many ways, is moving toward an oligarchy, which is a nation controlled by relatively small numbers of very, very wealthy people.
What is going on in this country today is that since 1973, 80 percent of all American families have seen their incomes either decline or at best remain stagnant. What is going on in my State of Vermont and what is going on all over this country today is that we are seeing working people work longer hours for lower wages. These families look to the future. They are extremely worried about what is going to happen to their kids because it appears very likely that for the first time in the modern history of the United States, our children will have a lower standard of living than we will have.
Mr. Speaker, this, in my view, is the most important issue facing this country. I get very disappointed as an Independent, as the only Independent in the Congress, that we do not see enough discussion here on that issue, certainly from the Republican leadership. We must have more of that discussion. What is also going on in this country is, not only is the middle class shrinking, but we are seeing another phenomenon that should be of concern to all people. That is that the wealthiest people in this country are becoming much wealthier at the same time as the middle class is shrinking.
We are looking at a schizophrenic economy. How bad is the situation today facing the working men and women of this country? Let me just make a few points. Again, these are points I think that should be made over and over again. Twenty years ago, the workers of the United States were the best compensated in the entire world. We were No. 1. Today, depending upon the study that you might look at, American workers rank 13 among industrialized nations in terms of compensation and benefits.
In fact, one of the great ironies of the current economic period is that we are seeing companies from Europe and elsewhere come to the United States in search of, quote unquote, cheap labor. In my State of Vermont and throughout this country, you can get hard-working individuals who must work for $6 or $7 an hour. Those are wages that large companies cannot get workers to work for in Europe. So we are seeing for certain European companies the United States becoming what Mexico is for American companies. That is a very sad state of affairs. Mr. Speaker, adjusted for inflation, the average pay for four-fifths of American workers plummeted by 16 percent in the 20 years between 1973 and 1993. In other words, whenever you turn on the television or whenever you read the newspapers, they talk about the booming economy. The economy is booming for someone, but it certainly is not booming for the middle class or the working people of this country.
Between 1973 and 1993, the average pay for four-fifths of American workers plummeted by 16 percent. People are working for significantly lower wages. In 1973, the average American worker earned $445 a week. Twenty years later, that worker was making $373 a week. That is the issue that should be debated here on the floor of the House, should be debated in the Senate every single day, should be debated all over this country. How did we go from 1st to 13th in the world in terms of the wages and benefits our workers received? How did it happen that the middle class is shrinking? How did it happen that real wages are declining? That is the $64 issue that should be addressed by the President, by the leadership of the Republican and Democratic parties. Mr. Speaker, as bad as the situation is for the middle class and middle-age, middle-class workers, the situation is far worse for young American workers. In the last 15 years, the wages for entry-level jobs for young men who are high school graduates has declined by 30 percent. Young families headed by persons younger than 30 saw their inflation-adjusted median income collapse by 32 percent from 1973 to 1990. Young families headed by someone between 25 and 24, these are young American families, had incomes $4,000 lower in 1991 than they did in 1979. Their entry-level wages were 10-percent lower in 1991 than in 1979.
What all those statistics mean is that for young people graduating high school going out into the job market, the wages that they are earning are significantly lower than was the case just 20 years ago. So, as bad as the situation is for middle-age people, it is a lot worse for younger people. That is an issue that we must address and analyze and correct. Americans at the lower end of the wage scale are now the lowest paid workers in the entire industrialized world. One percent of American workers with full-time jobs are paid so little that their wages do not enable them to live above the poverty level.
Mr. Speaker, we hear a whole lot, we heard it from President Reagan, we heard it from President Bush, we are hearing it from President Clinton about all of the new jobs that are being created. The sad truth, however, is that the vast majority if the jobs being created are low-wage jobs. These are the jobs that pay workers $6 an hour, they pay workers $7 an hour. They often bring no health care benefits, no retirement benefits, and no time off for vacations or sick leave.
Also, one of the frightening aspects of the new economy is that more and more of the new jobs being created are part-time jobs or temporary jobs. What we are seeing is that many employers would rather hire two people for 20 hours a week or for 30 hours a week rather than one worker for 40 hours a week because the employer does not have to pay any benefits.
In fact, in 1993, one-third of the United States work force was composed of, quote unquote, contingent labor, and that is temporary labor. That means that you get a job for 4 months, for 6 months and then you have to go out looking for another job again. There was a time not so long ago in our history when a real job meant 40 hours a week with benefits, decent health care, perhaps retirement, that you moved up the ladder if you did your job well. You made more money. You had a certain sense of job security.
It seems that those days are ancient history, as many of the new jobs that are being created are part-time jobs or temporary jobs. In the past 10 years, the United States has lost 3 million white collar jobs and 1.8 million jobs in manufacturing, just in the past 5 years. Five companies, Ford, AT&T, General Electric, ITT and Union Carbide alone have laid off well over 800,000 American workers in the last 15 years. Meanwhile, while the decent-paying jobs continue to disappear, the number of involuntary part-time workers tripled between 1970 and 1993.
People might be surprised to know that the largest private sector employer in the United States today is not General Motors. It is not General Electric. It is not IBM. It is Manpower Incorporated. They are the leading supplier of temporary employees.
Now, one of the tragic results of declining wages in America is that the average American worker is now working significantly more hours than used to be the case. The number of Americans working at more than one job has almost doubled over the last 15 years. So if the average American thinks, my God, I am the only person who has to work two jobs or three jobs, wake up. It is your neighbor doing that. It is people all over this country, because as real wages decline, people are just scrambling as hard as they can. Certainly in the State of Vermont, it is not unusual to see people working two jobs, three jobs, just to pay the bills.
Furthermore, when we talk about things like family values, I think what many of us mean is the ability of a husband and a wife to spend some quality time with their kids. I remember seeing a constituent of mine in Burlington, VT, who told me — she was shopping at a grocery store, that she was working three part-time jobs. Her husband was working four part-time jobs. They hardly ever had a chance to be together or, let alone, to spend time with their child.
That is what is happening all over this country. Not only are people working longer hours, in fact the average American is now working approximately 160 hours a year more than was the case just 20 years ago. But what we are also seeing is that more and more Americans are lacking adequate medical insurance.
We had a major debate here on the floor of the House several years ago about the need for a national health care policy. Those of us who advocated the right of all Americans to have health care as exists in virtually every other industrialized nation on earth, we lost that debate. The result is that 3 years later, we are seeing more and more Americans not only without any health insurance, but we are seeing more Americans who have inadequate health insurance. By that, I mean very high premiums, large deductibles, large copayments. The situation is such that many people, even when they are sick, hesitate to go to the doctor because they just cannot afford the bill.
In terms of home ownership, which is a key part of the American dream, that home ownership is also in rapid decline for the average American worker. As a result of lower and lower incomes, an increasing number of young Americans can no longer afford to purchase their own homes. In 1980, 21 percent of Americans under 25 owned their own homes. In 1987, only 16 percent did. The answer is obvious: If you are not making decent wages, there is no way you are going to be able to put a down payment or pay the mortgage on a home.
Mr. Speaker, while the middle class is in decline or the real wages of American workers are going down, or while many of the new jobs are being created to pay people $4.50, $5 and $6 an hour, there is another aspect of our economy that must be addressed. That is, clearly not everybody is hurting. Some people are doing very, very well.
This is an issue we just do not talk about enough. I think on this floor of the House, and certainly the media does not talk about it enough, today, the United States has the dubious distinction of having the most unfair distribution of wealth and income in the entire industrialized world. I think many of us used to think that in countries like England, where you have queens and dukes the lords and barons, that those were really class countries that you had a ruling class and an upper class and you had a lower class. But the truth of the matter is that the United States of America today has a much more unfair and unequal distribution of wealth than England. We have a much more unequal distribution than any other country on earth. Hardly ever talked about, this issue, but we should.
What is going on now is that the wealthiest 1 percent of the population own 40 percent of the wealth in this Nation. That is more wealth than the bottom 90 percent.
The richest 1 percent own more wealth than the bottom 90 percent, and that gap between the rich and the poor is growing wider.
But it is not only wealth. We also have the most unfair distribution of income in the entire industrialized world. The highest-earning 4 percent of our population make more money than do the bottom 51 percent.
Mr. Speaker, from 1979 to 1995, household incomes in the United States grew by $800 billion in real terms. But 50 percent of that sum went to the wealthiest 5 percent of households, and 97 percent of it went to the wealthiest 20 percent. The remaining 80 percent of families scrambled for the crumbs, divvying up just 3 percent of all income growth between them.
So, in other words, when we talk about the growth of the economy, what we should ask ourselves is who is gaining that income. And what is clearly going on is the lion's share, the overwhelming amount of the growth in income, is going to the very, very wealthiest people while the vast majority of the people are seeing a decline in their real incomes.
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of reasons why the United States is seeing a decline in its standard of living for its middle class and for its working people, and I think one of them certainly has to do with the decline in our industrial base, a decline of manufacturing in the United States of America. I would urge Members of Congress just to go to their local department stores in virtually any part of America and check the labels on the products that they are observing, and more and more what we are finding is that products are not manufactured in the United States, but they are manufactured in the Far East, they are manufactured in Malaysia. More and more they are manufactured in China. And we are not just talking about cheap products, but we are talking about top-of-the-line products as well.
And the reason that more and more products are being manufactured in China is that American companies are beginning, have invested tens and tens of billions of dollars in China, in Malaysia, in Latin America, in many other very poor Third World countries.
So the good news is that corporate America is creating millions of new jobs every single year. The bad news is that they are not creating those jobs in the State of Vermont or the United States of America. They are creating those jobs in China, and in Malaysia, and in Latin America.
Now, why are these companies running to these countries? Well, it does not take a Ph.D. in economics to figure it out. They are going to China because workers in China receive 20 cents an hour. There are workers in China who are 12 or 13 years of age making products that we in the United States are purchasing, and, Mr. Speaker, I might mention that I have introduced legislation which would prohibit the importation of products made in any country that is made by child labor. There are children in China, children in India, children in Pakistan, who are 10, 11, 12 years old who are working for minuscule wages, who are doing the work that American workers used to do.
It is no secret that this year we will have a trade deficit of about $160 million. That means we are importing $160 billion more in goods and services than we export. That equates to about 3 million decent manufacturing jobs
Mr. Speaker, in my view, we are not going to expand the middle class, we are not going to create decent-paying jobs for our young people unless we deal with the trade situation. I think the evidence is very clear that NAFTA has been a disaster, as many of us had feared it would be. I have very serious reservations about GATT.
We need a trade policy that is a fair trade policy, a trade policy that protects American workers, that allows us to export as well as import.
Mr. Speaker, if we are going to address the issue of raising wages in America, not only do we have to deal with the trade situation, not only do we have to become a country again which is building real products here in the United States of America, which is using our technology go create new jobs, producing real goods, but we also have to, in fact, raise the minimum wage, and I am delighted that more and more Members of Congress are beginning to understand that.
A number of years ago I brought forth legislation that would raise the minimum wage to $5.50 an hour. It was my view and is my view that if somebody in this country works for 40 hours a week, that person should not be living in poverty. That person should not be more in debt at the end of the week than he or she was in the beginning of the week. And when some of us began that crusade to raise the minimum wage, President Clinton was not on board, and many Democrats were not on board, and virtually no Republicans were on board. I am happy to say that right now we have a majority support for raising the minimum wage in the House, I believe that is the case in the Senate as well, and I certainly hope that the gentleman from Georgia, [Mr. Gingrich] will allow a clean minimum wage bill to come up in the House so that we can vote it in and have the President sign it.
The minimum wage today is at its lowest point in 40 years. If the minimum wage today was at the same level as it was in 1970, it would be over $6 an hour. So to raise the minimum wage to $5.50 an hour, as the President would have us do in 2 years, is a conservative effort, and it is something we should do immediately.
Mr. Speaker, if we are going to turn this country around, I think it is important that we also address the tax situation in this country. The fact of the matter is that as the rich become richer, as the middle class is shrinking, and as poor people are just fighting desperately to keep their heads above water, I think what we need to do is take a hard look at progressive taxation, and that is to say that the largest corporations who are today contributing significantly less to our national coffers than they did 30 or 40 years ago, to the richest people in this country who have enjoyed significant declines in their real tax rates, that it is appropriate to ask those people whose incomes are soaring to start paying their fair share of taxes so we can provide some real tax breaks for the middle class and the working people of this country.
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that wages in America have declined is that the trade union movement in America has also declined. I think it will not be a surprise to most American workers to understand that employers often do not, out of the generosity of their heart, pay decent wages. They pay decent wages because there are people who are negotiating with them to get them to pay decent wages.
One of the concerns that I have right now in this country is that it is harder and harder for workers to be able to form trade unions. Very often, employers will harass those workers who are trying to develop a union, they will fire those workers under all kinds of pretenses, they will bring in high-falutin consultants to try to frighten workers, they will threaten workers that they will go to Mexico and Asia.
I think we need a new set of labor law which says that any worker in this country who wants to join a union should have the freedom, without fear, to participate in that process, and I believe that as we strengthen the labor movement in this country, that is, more and more workers join unions, they will be stronger and be able to negotiate good contracts which will not only benefit them, but it will benefit the whole country. Nonunion workers benefit substantially when we have strong unions because unions drive wages up, and employers therefore must pay nonunion workers a decent wage as well.
Mr. Speaker, I will soon be introducing a piece of legislation which I think is quite important. One of the concerns that I have increasingly in this country is the degree to which the taxpayers of our Nation are subsidizing large corporations through corporate welfare. Very conservative groups as well as progressive groups estimate that we spend about $125 billion every year on corporate welfare, which is tax breaks and subsidies that go to some of the largest corporations in America, and let me give you just one example of something that I and some of my colleagues are working on right now.
It seems to me to be very wrong that when the United States Pentagon, when our Pentagon, negotiates with various defense contractors, that some of the CEO's of those defense companies end up making huge salaries, basically at taxpayer expense, at the same time as they are laying off tens and tens of thousands of American workers. We pay the President of the United States $250,000 a year, and it seems to me to be very wrong that the taxpayers of this country should be paying the CEO's of the major defense companies substantially more.
I think the taxpayers of America should be concerned, for example that in 1994 James Miller, who is the CEO of General Dynamics, earned $11.3 million in compensation. Now, what is interesting is that General Dynamics, as a percentage of their business, does 100 percent of their business with the U.S. Government, which means that the U.S. Government is paying Mr. Miller $11.3 million in income, and I think that is wrong for at least two reasons:
First, in terms of our deficit, I do not know why we are paying CEO's who are 100 percent dependent on taxpayer money over $11 million a year in compensation. That is wrong.
But, second of all, it is wrong as an example, as a model of what this Congress should be doing. One of the more shameful aspects of the American economy at this point is that CEO's of major corporations today are earning about 200 times what their workers are making; 200 times. That is unheard of in the industrialized world. It seems to me that the U.S. Congress should not be encouraging and supporting that type of economic activity.
So we have legislation, and I have introduced legislation along with several other Members, that would say to the CEO's of the major defense companies that they cannot earn from the taxpayers of this country more than $200,000 a year in compensation.
I should point out once more that the head of General Dynamics receives $11.3 million, and as best we could understand, every single penny of that money comes from the taxpayers of this country. That does not make any sense. We are cutting back on so many programs that working people need and to say, yeah, we got $11 million to pay the head of General Dynamics makes no sense. And I should point out that this very same company has laid off over 35,000 workers between 1990 and 1995.
So these guys are making more and more money from the taxpayers at exactly the same time as they are laying off tens of thousands of American workers. That does not make any sense to me at all.
Mr. Speaker, I think you know sometimes Members of the Congress become a little bit obsessed with ourselves and we think that the end of the world is the Beltway around here. But we should pay attention to the fact that tens of millions of people are giving up on the political process, they are giving up on the two-party system. Again, it is an issue that we do not talk about too much, but maybe as the only Independent in the Congress I can raise the issue, and that is there is something fundamentally wrong with the politics of this country when in the last election, in 1994, only 38 percent of the people came out to vote. 62 percent of the people did not vote.
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of reasons for that. But I think the major reason has to do with the fact that large numbers of people who are hurting very, very badly no longer believe that the U.S. Congress represents their interests or is capable of responding to their needs and their pain, and they are saying, hey, politics, it does not matter, we do not care what is going on in Washington, we do not pay attention to what is going on in Washington because all these people are living in another world.
I think, given the fact that so many men and women have put their lives on the line, have fought and died to defend freedom and democracy in this country, it is a very sad state of affairs that the United States has today by far the lowest voter turn out of any industrialized nation on earth.
Now how do we turn that around? How do we create a vibrant democracy where we have 70 to 80 percent of the people voting rather than 40 percent of the people or 50 percent?
I think, frankly, the answer is that this Congress has got to show the American people that we do feel their pain, that we do understand what is going on in their lives, and we are willing to respond to their problems. If we do not respond to their problems, people are going to say, "It does not make any difference. Why do I have to get involved?"
It is a catch-22. Unless ordinary people begin to stand up and say, wait a second, the U.S. Congress, representing all of the people in this country and not just the very rich, in the United States of America we should be able to provide health insurance for every man, woman, and child, as most of the industrialized nations do; in the United States of America we should be able to make sure that every young person who has the ability is able to get a college education, as many of our industrialized neighbors do; that in the United States of America we should be able to create decent paying jobs; that unless the people make those demands on the Congress and start electing people to the Congress who are going to fight for the middle class, fight for the working people, the Congress is going to be unresponsive.
That takes us to another issue in terms of how and why the Congress is unresponsive. That takes us to campaign finance reform. Clearly there is something very much amiss when increasingly we are seeing in Congress, in State houses all over America, very wealthy people taking out their checkbooks and writing themselves large checks and saying, "Gee, I think I would like to run for President. It is kind of boring in business now, I have a midlife crisis, I would like to do something else. I will make out a check and then run for the Presidency. I will run for Governor, I will run for the Senate," so forth and so on. That is not what democracy is supposed to be about.
A democracy is not supposed to be about the Democratic and Republican Parties holding fund-raisers here in Washington, D.C. I think last month, or a couple of months ago, the Republicans raised $16 million in one night, and recently the Democrats raised $12 million in one night, money which is coming from some of the wealthiest people in the United States of America, some of the largest corporations in the United States of America. Some of these guys contribute to both political parties. Is that what democracy is supposed to be about? I think not.
I think we must move toward campaign finance reform, and the most important aspects of that is we have to limit the amount of money that people can spend in a campaign. If you limit the amount of money, you take away the advantage of the big money interests. They cannot outspend you 10 to 1.
I think we have to move toward public funding of elections, combined with incentives coming from small donations, matching small donations. In that way we will have people who are serving in Congress who come from the ranks of ordinary people and simply are not hobnobbing with the wealthy and the powerful.
Most importantly, what concerns me is that tens and tens of millions of Americans believe the political process does not matter to them. They have given up on the political process. That is very, very sad. I would suggest to people, and I say this as somebody who was the mayor of a city for 8 years and am now in my third term in the U.S. Congress, that the only solution, basically, to that situation is for ordinary people to begin to stand up and fight back and reclaim this country for the ordinary people, for the middle class, for the working people of this country, and inform the U.S. Congress that all of us have a right to a decent standard of living and a good life. All of our children have the right to a good future. That right should not just exist to the very wealthy and the very powerful, but that is not going to change unless people get involved in the political process, unless people understand what is going on at all levels of government.
Mr. Speaker, let me just simply conclude by stating that in this great country, if democracy is to survive, if all of our people are to enjoy a decent standard of living, that is not a Utopian vision, that can happen, but people have got to be involved in the political process and have got to stand up and fight for their rights.

Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do now adjourn.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Moakley] for yielding this time to me, and I thank the gentleman from New York [Mr. Solomon] for placing an order in the Committee on the Budget placing in order the Black Caucus/Progressive Caucus budget, which I think is the only real alternative that we are going to be hearing today and is the budget that speaks to the needs of ordinary working Americans.
When we discuss the budget situation in America today, it seems to me to be imperative to ask how did we get where we are today, how did we end up with a $5 trillion national debt? Is it because we are spending too much on health care so that all Americans have health care? I do not think so. Is it because the Federal Government is spending too much on education so that all American families could send their kids to college? Is that the reason we have the deficit? Is it because we are spending too much on affordable housing so that we have no homelessness in America, so that people are not paying 40, 50, 60 percent of their income in rent; is that why we have a $5 trillion debt? I do not think so.
Most economists understand that the reason we are in the deficit crisis we are today is that during the 1980's three things happened. First, we gave huge tax breaks to the richest people in America and to the largest corporations. Everybody knows that. What the Republican budget does today is it says, "Guess what? Let us give more tax breaks to the richest people in America and the largest corporations. That makes a lot of sense."
Second of all, during the 1980's, everybody knows this, this country spent huge amounts of money on the military, tremendous increases in defense spending. What the Republican budget says is let us spend more money today now that the cold war is over; let us spend more money, $13 billion more, on defense than the President wants. Let us build more B-2 bombers that the Pentagon does not need. Let us go into that absurd star wars program, that is really where we have to go.
Does that make sense? I do not think so.
And the third reason that we had, we created the deficit situation today, is the tremendous increase in medical spending, health care spending. During the 1980's all health care spending went up, including Medicare. But the question that we have to ask is why is it that the United States of America, today we spend far more per capita on health care than any other industrialized nation on Earth? Is it because all of our people have health insurance? Is that the reason why? I do not think so. Forty million Americans have no health insurance, millions more have inadequate health insurance.
So let us get to the root of the problem. What the Progressive Caucus and the Black Caucus say is, yes, let us move toward a balanced budget in 6 years, but let us not do it on the backs of the middle class, the working class and the low-income people in this country, and we are presenting a real alternative, and we hope to have the support of the Members in this body.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Kevin Gannon, a high school student from Brattleboro, VT. Kevin was speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
Years ago when someone wanted to tell you not to waste a resource, you might have said, "Hey, it doesn't grow on trees." Today, you don't have to be a tree-hugger to see the irony in that. Century-old forests are disappearing, and dwindling timber isn't our only environmental concerns when it comes to building materials. Landfills are fast becoming "landfulls," and countless other resources are either becoming scarce or are hazardous to process. But now a new generation of building products offers alternatives, and as concern grows about the environment a vanguard of builders [and] architects * * * around the country are setting new standards for resource-efficient home construction. Housing developments for conservation-conscious consumers (as shown on the poster) are being built around the country. To identify resource-efficient building material, you must ask the following questions: Do the products use virgin resources efficiently? Do they make reasonable use of recycled materials? Will they offer high quality durability over the life of the house, and will they help ease pollution? Engineered wood products can use as little as half the wood fiber of sawed lumber, while delivering superior performance. Made from wood chips and veneers, they help to preserve large trees and reduce demand for timber * * * Laminated veneer is now taking the place of massive beams. The latest efforts in manufacturing engineered lumber focus on making better use of fast-growing trees and combining them with adhesives that don't emit toxic, ureaformaldehyde * * * [Another] corporation makes a product * * * which uses cotton fiber. Since most paper comes from fast-growing pulpwood trees, reusing it in wallboard won't spare many big, slow-growing species; but there are other products that might. One is a floor-sheeting panel from the Belcom Technologies. The panels only need support at their corners, minimizing the number needed. On a national level, that's hundreds of thousands of joists — or trees — spared. If you really want to save wood, use steel. Using steel studs in your next framing job could reduce the amount of wood used in a house by up to 50%. Two-thirds of the steel that goes into structural components comes from building and bridge demolition, auto and industrial scrap. However, if for some reason steel framing doesn't appeal to you, you can buy some * * * double-dipped zinc-coated storm-guard nails [made] exclusively from remelted steel. Recycled glass bottles have become a prime source in fiberglass insulation, but an Indiana corporation has found a constructive use for scrap automotive glass; in fact, 70% of its new traffic tiles come from automotive glass manufacturing waste. CTE Glass Products makes * * * ceramic floor tiles with waste from its lightbulb manufacturing division. There are many ways to recycle wood. In San Jose, CA, New World Lumber rescues discarded redwood from the Gualdalupe landfill; after planing off the weathered surfaces, it assembles short sections between deducted rails to make fence-board, or they slice longer pieces into lattice. The firm also plans to make 24"-wide fence panels. Building structures to last longer is another responsible approach to building. In the '90's, inexpensive materials at this point don't lend themselves to that. Cheap building materials can also pose health hazards; for example, inexpensive particle-board releases ureaformaldehyde in your home. Time allowing, I would speak all day about this topic. Congressman Sanders: Kevin, that was a very thoughtful presentation. Can I ask you a very brief question? What impact do you think your ideas would have on the economy in terms of creating jobs, and what kind of jobs might be created? Answer. Well, right now the remodeling business alone is a $2 billion industry; that's just remodeling, not even construction, which is multi-billion. And one of my ideas is to create jobs. Subsidized housing is a problem in America, and if we could use recycled resources, I think we could kind of kill two birds with one stone. Congressman Sanders: So you think this idea could put people to work. Answer. Oh, definitely. Congressman Sanders: Good, Kevin, thank you very much.

Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the requisite number of words.
Mr. Chairman, earlier today I introduced an amendment which would reduce intelligence spending by 10 percent. It received, I believe, 115 votes. Just a few minutes ago the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Frank] introduced an amendment that would freeze intelligence spending. It received 193 votes.
My sincere hope is that we can receive another 20 votes to pass the Schroeder amendment. I will tell my colleagues why. Month after month and day after day, Members from both sides of the aisle come here on the floor of the House, and they talk about the $5 trillion national debt. They talk about the deficit, and they talk about how important it is and how necessary it is to cut program after program after program. My friend from Washington a moment ago talked about his fear that we would be "disciplining this agency."
Mr. Chairman, by overspending on intelligence, by spending more money than we need for the National Reconnaissance Office, an agency that has misplaced, that has lost $4 billion of taxpayers' money, what we are doing is disciplining hungry children in America. We are disciplining families who would like Federal funding in order to send their kids to college. We are disciplining senior citizens who get by on $7,000 or $8,000 a year Social Security but do not have the help from the Federal Government to purchase prescription drugs.
We are disciplining tens of millions of people who would like some help from the Federal Government. But we are saying, not only can we not afford it, we are going to cut back on what we are currently providing because we think we need to spend this money on the intelligence agencies, despite the end of the cold war.
Mr. Chairman, I know that many Members in this body are terribly sincere, both sides of the aisle, terribly sincere about deficit reduction. I know that they have been reluctant and with pain have made cuts that they know are going to hurt millions of middle-class working class, low-income families. I beseech those same Members who have made those cuts that impact negatively on people who are hurting today to have the courage to stand up and say that, when we have an agency that has misplaced $4 billion, the very least we can do to protect our credibility is to say to that agency that we are going to level fund you.
The gentlewoman from Colorado [Mrs. Schroeder] did not say we are going to cut their funding in half. That is not what she said. She came forward with a very conservative amendment. Level fund an agency that has misplaced $4 billion. We need 20 votes more to finally say to the American people that we are serious about deficit reduction. Please support the Schroeder amendment.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding the time to me.
Mr. Speaker, the most important economic issue facing this country is that the people on top, the wealthiest people, are becoming richer, the middle class is shrinking, and more and more of the new jobs that we are creating in this country are low-wage jobs paying people $4.25 an hour, $4.50 an hour, $5 an hour. The minimum wage today in terms of purchasing power is at its lowest point in 40 years.
Mr. Speaker, the American people want and the working people want to see a situation in which every working person in this country can work 40 hours a week and not live in poverty. It is incumbent upon this body to have an opportunity to vote for a clean up-or-down increase in the minimum wage.
Our Republican friends say the Democrats should have raised the minimum wage 2 years ago. They are right; they should have, and I had a bill in the hopper to do just that. But 2 years later means more and more people are living in poverty. Two years later means that today finally we should increase the minimum wage.

Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Missouri for yielding this time to me.
From the first day that I took office here in the Congress in 1991 I have been fighting to raise the minimum wage, and I hope very much that my colleagues finally are going to do the right thing on behalf of tens of millions of workers and raise the minimum wage today.
Mr. Speaker, when the minimum wage was first established in the 1930's, the opponents then said that the world was going to come to an end, the economy was going to collapse. And every single time that an effort has been made since then to raise the minimum wage, the same cries have come forward: The world is going to come to an end, we cannot raise the minimum wage.
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that today, at $4.25 an hour, the minimum wage is a starvation wage. The minimum wage today, in terms of purchasing power, is 26 percent less than it was 20 years ago. In terms of purchasing power it is at its lowest point in the last 40 years.
Mr. Speaker, there are tens of millions of Americans today who are working hard at $4.25 an hour, at $5 an hour, at $5.25 an hour, and they are unable to take care of the financial needs of their family. They are unable to put away money so that their kids can go to college. They cannot go on a vacation. Every single week, despite 40 or 50 hours of work, they are in as bad shape at the end of the week as they were before the week began.
Mr. Speaker, one of the great economic problems facing our country today is that the richest people are becoming richer, the middle class is shrinking, and most of the new jobs are being created are low-wage jobs.

Mr. Speaker, the great crisis facing this country today is the decline in real wages for American workers and the proliferation of low-wage jobs. We have millions and millions of workers today who are trying to survive on $4.25 an hour, $5 an hour. They are not making it. Raising the minimum wage is long overdue, and we must do it today.
The situation is so bad and the Federal Government has so much failed to stand up to its responsibility that 10 States in this country on their own, including the State of Vermont, have raised the minimum wage. Now, if the minimum wage is so bad, tell the Republican Governor of New Jersey, who supports their increase in the minimum wage, to roll it back. She will not do it because she knows, as every other Governor knows, that it is vital to raise the minimum wage today.
Lastly, it is incomprehensible to me that I am hearing people talk about abolishing the minimum wage. They really want to see workers in America earning a dollar an hour, $2 an hour, competing against the workers in China who make 20 cents an hour. That is not the future of America.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Matthew Dole, a high school student from St. Johnsbury, VT. He was speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
My name is Matthew Dole. I face censorship every day as I watch movies, try to read a book or even read the newspaper. All people have beliefs on what should be censored, but those should not infringe on others' choices. If you are to ban books, please do it [right], but don't force your opinions upon others. Proponents of censorship base their argument on the First Amendment. They interpret their Freedom of Speech as freedom to ban books. The opponents also use the First Amendment as a major right, not to be infringed upon. They have the freedom of choice, choice to read or watch whatever they want. They say that the proponents do not have the right to physically remove the books from our libraries and school shelves. People against censorship see it as large government once again challenging the individual, as was done in 1919 with Prohibition, later repealed. They ask for more local control, at the most local in fact — individual decision. In this, the era of political correctness, people challenge books on today's standards. They do not historicize texts, meaning they don't consider the time or circumstances under which it was written. I have with me today three books that have been banned. The first one is Mark Twain's, "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." To historicize this book, it was written in 1884, as Twain lived in Mississippi, and he had previously fought as a Confederate in the Civil War. It was banned for racism, and the reason for that was the circumstances under which it was written. The second book is "Catcher in the Rye." This was banned for sexual scenes. I read this last year as a sophomore in high school as part of a Classic American Literature section. The third, and last, book is Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind." This book was again banned for racism, and the reason [is that] if it hadn't had racism in it, it wouldn't have been historically correct. It is a book about the Confederate South, once again; and it was also banned for one word. As I've said, violence, racism and sex — three touchy, controversial subjects, are the most common reasons for book banning. Will banning the books make these issues disappear? I say, "No." They may, however, help educate people on these issues. What we must do instead is educate our children early. We can teach them to have opinions, and teach them why they can't read that book, or why they shouldn't read that book. As time passes, they will be able to handle the issues, before being offended. Also, they will be able to personally ban books, TV with the V-chip and movies with the rating system. There's no "cut and dried" solution to this. If a case in book banning or any other censorship were to reach the Supreme Court, they can interpret the First Amendment. Or if two-thirds of each House vote in Congress, they could rewrite the First Amendment more specifically. And on a more local level, if two-thirds of all state legislatures wanted to, they could call an actual Convention and rewrite it themselves Thank you for inviting me, and I hope something can be done on this issue. Congressman Sanders: Thank you very much, Matthew. Matthew, let me ask you a question, because you have dealt with a very sensitive and controversial issue. So, here's my question: if at town meeting, or better yet a school board meeting, a parent gets up and says, "I read this book. It is vulgar, it has filthy words in it, it has ideas that I don't want my daughter to see; I want that book out of the library." You're a member of the school board — how do you respond to that? Answer: Tell her that we can ban the book, in a sense, ban by putting it in, maybe, a section, like an adult section or a high school section. This happened at my old school, as a matter of fact, and they did not remove it from the library, and just put it in a separate section. What happened, was a 5th grader was basically in the high school section, reading this book. And I would ask them to educate . . . their kids, and I would ask the teachers also need to educate their kids on why they shouldn't read that book at that age. Congressman Sanders: In your judgment, what is the danger of somebody defining a book and saying, "This book is terrible, I want it out." What are the long-term repercussions of that approach? Answer: With these books that I've brought — these are classics, these are used in teaching. If we lose these books, we lose a valuable tool in teaching our youth. Congressman Sanders: So what you're saying is that what may be vulgar for one person may be a work of art and a classic for somebody else. Answer: That's right.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Kara von Behren, Sara Reeve, Anna Laszewski, and Alison Gingras, students from Peoples Academy in Vermont. They were speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
The environment needs a place in the modern high school curriculum. Without knowledge of the problems that fact us, we cannot reverse their ill effect. We're going to start off with a demonstration. Could you all stand up, please? Thanks. All right, we're going to start off with a couple of questions, and if your answer is "no," could you please sit back down. Okay, our first question is: do you recycle at home? Our second question is: do you compost at home? Do you turn off the water when you brush your teeth? Do you reuse your lunch bags or bring a cloth one? Does your family buy recycled products? All right, congratulations to any of you who are still standing (one or two)--you actually have some part in preserving our environment, and helping us to make this world a better place. As an American Literature class, we compiled a survey, trying to find out how educated our high school was about the environment. We surveyed students in grades 9 through 12, as well as the faculty members. The questions ranged from, "what does EPA stand for?" to "how long are your showers?" to "how do you feel about the future of our world?" We discovered that many students didn't know much about environmental action programs — they didn't know the budget cuts would completely eliminate them. Students and teachers both felt that more time should be spent in the classroom discussing environmental issues, and that a definite part of the curriculum should be dedicated to it. It's not an issue only for science classes; it can be brought into every major course of study. For example, we took a normal letter-writing assignment and transformed it into an environmental letter-writing campaign. We wrote letters to our Congressional delegation in Washington about budget cuts and other environmental issues. This is only one of the ways in which we've incorporated environmental education into our classroom, without completely altering the basic curriculum. And we have these letters, and later on we'd like to give them to you, Congressman. Congressman Sander. That was a very creative and interesting testimony. I think the essence of what you're saying is that if people think in an environmentally conscious way, we can have a profound impact on the environment. In a broader sense, what would you describe as the major environmental crisis our planet faces? Answer. We've concentrated mostly on the budget cuts planned in the environmental action programs such as the EPA. The drastic cuts would completely eliminate clean water acts, safe drinking water, the state revolving funds that allow cities and counties to create protective water systems, such as sewer treatment plants. . . . Our second presentation will cover more of that.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by A.J. Ferriter, a high school student from Thetford, VT, who was speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
For the last few months, I've been investigating lobbying in Vermont, and found, much to my surprise, and delight, a healthy lobbying system. The Disclosure Act purged many of the ills affecting lobbying within Vermont, by virtually stopping all underhand deals, while, at the same time, not infringing upon our rights as Vermonters and U.S. citizens. Yet we should not be content; problems still plague our lobbying system. Fortunately, my investigations have brought me in contact with district Representatives and state Senators throughout Vermont, and without leading them on, each district Representative and state Senator I spoke with expressed one common concern: lobbying groups using tax dollars to support themselves. This is not a problem with profit-making organizations (which is businesses), because they support themselves. It is a problem among non-profit organizations . . . whose promoters are given the title, "advocate," instead of "lobbyist." I am concerned with two issues in the way advocates use tax dollars. The first is the use of financial support. Although many groups use their funds properly, many do not. Instead of using tax dollars to support their cause, the money is used to support themselves. In other words, this money is given to these organizations to support more administrative positions, and more lobbyists. This money was given to aid a public cause, not to support lobbyists. Tax dollars paying for lobbyists' salaries is an alarming issue. Even if the tax dollars are being used properly, "is it right," in the words of one state Senator, "to use our tax dollars against us?" I do not believe it is. Take for instance, community mental health, a group whose objectives I support. Hypothetically, though, let's say I don't. If I don't, then I am not going to want my money supporting their programs; and if I speak out against them, they will just use the money I pay the state in taxes to further support lobbyists to speak out against me. So the more I speak out, the more money I am eventually giving to lobbyists I'm speaking out against. This is not encouraging. Now, I'm not saying I am completely adverse to advocates, and forcing them to have the same nominal status as lobbyists. If they did, they might not receive the necessary funds they need to stay alive and support the crucial issues that they promote. Yet, if these human service, non-profit groups were forced to have the same status as lobbyists who represent profit-making organizations, then our tax dollars would no longer be used to support their lobbyists. I say, use our money to support their policies, but find donations or something else to support your lobbyists. I cannot stop the government from spending my money on programs I'm not in favor of, but I should be able to stop the practice of giving my money to support lobbyists, whether I agree with their views or not. I believe a line must be drawn somewhere. Thank you. Congressman Sanders: Thank you very much, A.J. That's an interesting presentation, and it's an issue that's being dealt with in Congress, and in Montpelier as well. Let me ask you a question: if I represent the tobacco industry — we heard a presentation earlier about the problems of young people smoking — and I represent the large cigarette companies that have billions of dollars in resources, and I hire some of the most sophisticated lobbyists in the country to knock on the doors of members of Congress, or in the statehouses throughout this country. I have plenty of money to do that, okay? Answer. All right. Congressman Sanders: And I don't get any taxpayer dollars to do that — I do that privately, all with the company's own money. Then on the other hand, we have a group of young people, say, who are concerned about the problems of smoking; they also want to lobby. One has billions of dollars in resources, the other side has very little money. How would you deal with that issue, so that both sides have a short at having their voices heard? Answer. Would it be all right if you . . . rephrase your question? I kind of got lost in there. Congressman Sanders: Okay. Here's the problem that I want to throw at you: He represents (he doesn't really) but let's say hypothetically he's the head of a large tobacco company-- Philip Morris — and he has billions of dollars in resources. He wants the U.S. Congress to not do anything to limit the ability of the tobacco companies to make a lot of money. We have another group of young people, who are concerned about the impact of smoking on the health of their friends. They also want to get involved in the political process. They certainly don't have the resources — how do you deal with that issue? Answer. I mean, that's obviously a concern, that I feel is valid. But I feel like if the young students are going up [against] a tobacco giant here, they have to have some way of being able to gain support throughout their communities. I don't know if it would be sending letters out; I don't know if it's public speaking. I'm not sure what it would be, but it has to be something — obviously, they can't do it through money, and . . . you bring up a good argument to my case. But the thing is, the tobacco industries do have the money, and it's a basic right to be able to lobby for what you want; and so we cannot restrict that. For these students, though, like I said . . . one of the problems, I think, with lobbying is that a lot of it is not made public. With some of the public hearings we've got happening in Montpelier, there will be, let's say, an issue on tobacco. And what will happen is that there will be a lobbyist within the room so that he can tell his friends to garner support for the lobbyists, and show up at the public meeting. And the meeting is only 24 or 48 hours later, so that way people don't advocate tobacco don't have the time to just pick up their stuff and find an argument to oppose the tobacco arguments. Congressman Sanders: You make a good, an interesting point. A lot of members of Congress and the legislature feel resentful when publicly supported institutions then come and lobby them, and that's the point that you're making. The other side of the story is, that groups that do not need public support — like the tobacco industry, or the chemical companies — they have huge amounts of resources to lobby, and in many ways therefore have an unfair advantage in terms of people from the other point of view. So those are the two sides of that argument. Answer. Yeah, like I said . . . in the speech, we have to support their cause, but I don't feel like — if I don't agree with what these youngsters are saying, I don't want to have my money going to support their lobbyists. Fine, the cause — I can't control that, but control the lobbyists.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by David Smith, a high school student from Brattleboro, VT, who was speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people:
A couple of days ago, I heard two men laughing about the term, "representation of the people," claiming that the people are no longer really represented. Unfortunately, I'm beginning to agree with this, because I have a problem believing that a politician is going to think about me — the average voter — when the oil and gas industry gives Congress $17-18 million annually; when the health industry gives $68.8 million, when the banking industry gives $42.1 million; and that's just to name a few. Our government is overrun by the influences of special interest groups, industries, corporations, unions and other bit spenders. But you, the politicians, are also stuck, because the average House election is up way past $150,000; the average Senate election is up past $3.5 million. And that's average, which means that the backwater, small-time candidate has no chance of competing with the mainstream Republican or Democrat, because he or she has no corporate, big-spender backing. In short our campaign finance system is outdated, flawed, and full to the brim with loopholes. We need changes. What I'm proposing today is a publicly financed system. My proposal starts in September, 8 months before an election, with candidates collecting low-dollar contributions. This is the only private money in my whole system; and, since it's low-dollar, it doesn't have any influence over a candidate. This seen money lasts until the first primary in February. To qualify for public financing, candidates must receive 20% of the vote. Parties may also qualify for public financing by getting 20% of the vote between two candidates, and sending their most winning . . . candidate to run. Candidates who receive the required vote will receive an account of money to work with. In addition to monetary funds, the candidates will also receive radio and TV space. But instead of getting 45 second soundbites, candidates will receive 15 minute blocks, almost like "informercials," and this will force them to really discuss in detail their platforms. And you can also get debates going, and really educate the public. Lastly, government will pay for one or two mass mailings per candidate. Winners of the national conventions will then be given money to campaign in the general election. Now, how are we going to pay for this? The Working Group on Electoral Democracy estimated that a plan similar to this one would cost between $5-600 million annually. And I've devised two ways to pay for this: the first is a $6 flat tax on every taxpaying American. Unfortunately, the taxpayers don't really want another tax. So, an alternative plan would be a one dollar check-off box on tax returns for Congressional funding, right next to the one for Presidential funding. Also, a one percent shift in funds from the military to campaign finances, and last, the first national lotto game. Vermont alone already receives around $23 million in funds from various lotto games, and I think that a national lottery game could bring in at least half of the money needed to fund this campaign system. What this system will do, is it will do 5 things: first, it will stop all public legislation from being influenced by the wealth of industries, corporations, all private money will be taken out of politics. Second, it creates a level playing field for all candidates, rich and poor candidates must have the same chance of being elected as everyone else, and voters must start to elect candidates on their merits, not on their money. Thirdly, it allows politicians to spend their time at politics, not at campaigning. I've heard that politicians spend between anywhere from 40-80% of their time campaigning. In this system, they would spend 5% of their time campaigning. [Fourth] it will allow politicians to get in touch with what voters want, not what the heavy contributors want. If they have to go to the grassroots to get their support, then there will be more talk about what the real voters want. Finally, it closes down all loopholes, so that no private money can influence the private system, and we will return to the ideal of "representation of the people." Congressman Sanders. Thank you. (Applause) You've touched on a very important issue. David, let me ask you a couple of questions. First, give us some examples, if you might, of the role that big money plays in influencing politics, influencing legislation. Do you have any examples that you might be able to provide? Answer. Sure. A little while ago, the Legislature allocated money for the Pentagon to build new bombers. This was in spite of the Pentagon saying that, "We don't want any new bombers, we don't want the money." The reason the money was allocated, was because of the influence of the corporations that make and help produce those bombers. They have such power, with their monetary funds that they can almost shape the way legislation works. Congressman Sanders: You're absolutely right, that is a very good example. Let me ask you the second question: recently the Speaker of the House went on a tour around the country, and he spoke at $10,000/plate fundraising dinners; $10,000/plate to have dinner with House Speaker Gingrich. Why would anybody pay $10,000 — it was a very good dinner, no doubt — but other than the good quality food, and you think of another good reason why someone would want to go to dinner with the Speaker for $10,000/plate? Answer. Sure. It was influence. By paying $10,000 to a candidate, you get influence over that candidate so they will better represent what you want. An example: if I was a politician and I came back to the office one day and there were 14 messages for me; 13 were from people I never heard of, and the last was from someone who has paid me $10,000 at a local charity the week before, the first person I'm going to call back is that big payer. So, by paying lots of money, we get more influence.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Alison Carpenter, a high school student from Brattleboro, VT, who was speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
Children suffer at the hands of adults. They are beaten, kicked and burned with cigarettes. They are thrown against walls, scalded by hot water, forced to stand in freezing showers until they pass out, and thrown into running washing machines. They are sexual molested: they are the victims of incest. Child abuse is a serious issue that has existed throughout history, and it is a major concern in our society today. It was not until recently that it was recognized as a medical and social problem. Child abuse takes many forms: it occurs whenever an adult inflicts intentional physical, emotional or sexual harm to a child. There are many steps that are being taken to prevent all three forms of child abuse, but it will take a long time to fully eliminate it. The most common form of abuse on children is physical abuse. There are approximately 200 cases of physical abuse for every one that is reported, according to the National Committee for the Protection of Child Abuse. A child is the victim of physical violence even if the anger is not directly inflicted on him or her. A witness to violence is a victim of violence. Children who witness abuse at home can suffer in unseen ways. Quite often, their pain goes untreated; they can suffer serious emotional damage. Children need a large amount of emotional support from their families. Some elements of emotional support include: respecting the child's needs, tolerating his or her feelings, and a willingness to learn from their behavior. Our emotions are one of our basic powers. Emotional abuse is form of psychological battering. A child's earliest needs in life are for a warm, loving person to be there, to mirror, echo and affirm them. Children need to be prized, and applauded during their growth achievement. If they do not get this, they will do whatever they can in order to. These are basic needs. Children need to be allowed to feel, and to express what they feel. If a child is controlled compulsively, he or she will become an adult with a compulsive, controlling and immature childish side. Some forms of emotional abuse are yelling, belittling, criticizing, humiliating and comparing a child. Incest, or sexual abuse, is the most shaming of any form of violence, because it involves the betrayal of a supposed loved one. It leaves a long-term effect on the child, believing it was their fault. It is a violation of the child's sexuality. Some people believe that children may simply imagine episodes of sexual abuse. An argument that is made by psychologists, is that a young child who has not been molested, has not had the experience of with sex to be capable of imagining such an experience. The profile of an abuser tends to be very similar in all forms of child abuse. An abuser is usually someone who has a poor self-image; someone who lacks sensitivity to others' feelings. A person who abuses was most likely abused themselves, or was deprived of basic parenting. An abuser has usually had unmet needs for love or comfort, and is in denial about his or her feelings. Child abuse has a tremendous impact on victims throughout their entire lives. They tend to feel helpless and out of control. The victims tend to dissociate from all of their memories, and begin to feel a sense of unreality. They may have recurring nightmares, sleep disorders or flashbacks. As they get older, they tend to develop split or multiple personalities. They have little or no interest in anything, trouble completing thought processes, confusion, and no trust. A girl who has been abused sexually grows up to believe that she cannot escape being battered. A boy who has been abused may believe in male supremacy. Boy victims, more than girls, identify with the offenders, and sometimes become offenders. This bonding with abusers is a way to overcome the feeling of helplessness and powerlessness. There are many actions that are being taken against child abuse. Forty-nine States (except for Wyoming), have established children's trust funds. All of the States have a Child Protective Service system, which is a government system that is responsible for investigating reports of child abuse or neglect. This, however, lacks the resources needed to respond to overwhelming number of reports. All States also have a child abuse reporting law, requiring reports of suspected abuse to be made by specified professionals, or others whose work brings them in regular contact with children. There are also family preservation services, that are working to make it so the child can remain with his or her family as long as his safety is not endangered. Private organizations, such as Mothers Against Raping Children and Mothers of Sexually Abused Infants and Children serve as support groups, and fight for the rights of children. We Can Help Ourselves is another organization that teaches children how to handle abusive sitations. There are still many things that need to be done to help prevent the abuse of children. States need to provide even more services for victims of abuse. They need to look at the quality of foster care, because it needs to be more than just giving a child a place to live. People need to be more alert to possible child abuse cases, and to report them to the authorities. Those in a position of authority need to investigate quickly and accurately, and take the first steps to remove children from abusive situations. We need to bring offenders to court, and most of all, we need to stop abusing our children. Bringing a child into the world is a huge responsibility, that two people make and must live with forever. Parenting is not temporary; it is not something that can be put aside when a person wants a break. Child abuse is an awful cycle, which travels from generation to generation. As author John Bradshaw says, "It is about the silence of nights spent holding in screams, holding back tears, holding in one's very self." One of the main causes of child abuse is the lack of education that this country has. There are so many people who do not know what is morally right from wrong. Children should be able to look up to their parents without fearing them. Our society as a whole needs to work together to stop child abuse. The first step in this long fight is to educate. Now is not the time to cut back on education services. One quote I believe summarizes the issue is, "If a child live with criticism, he learns to condemn. If a child lives with hostility, he learns to fight. If a child lives with shame, he learns to feel ashamed." Thank you. Congressman Sanders: Thank you, Alison. Alison has touched on one of the most tragic issues that we as a country face, and that is that there are hundreds and hundreds of thousands of little kids and teenagers who are being abused. And as Alison indicated, that type of abuse has a profound impact on one's ability to grow up to be a mature adult. Alison, let me just ask you a couple of questions. Why is it, do you think-- what goes through an adult's mind, a grown-up person's mind who would abuse a child. What motivates somebody to do that, do you think? Answer: I think that an abuser is one who has a lot of inside pain, and they don't know any other way of handling their pain, and they take it out on children, because children don't really fight back. Children, they're the only thing that they can take it out on, because they . . . don't have the ability to fight back. Congressman Sanders: I think . . . that's a very good answer. Let me ask you another question. Very specifically, and I know you touched on this a little bit, what can we do to ameliorate that problem? What do we as a community, as a society, as a country, how do we address that tragedy? Answer. I think that the most important thing is to educate, not only the abusers but the children of abusers, so that children know that this isn't right; that what they have been growing up in is not a good situation. Because, quite often children who are abused grow up to be abusers, because they don't know any better, and I think we need to educate them and show them that this isn't the way that our society should be. Congressman Sanders: Alison, thank you very much for that excellent testimony.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues, I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Amy DeCarmine, Amber Johnson, Beth Carmine, and Nathina Roy, high school students from Vermont, who were speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people
The Summer Youth Employment Program has kept us off the streets; kept us from the use of drugs, alcohol and violence of any type. The Youth Program has also given us the experience of how living can be in real life, and how to conserve money for our future. There can be nothing more positive in our lives than the Summer Youth Employment Program; it is a continuance of encouragement of being a responsible young adult. The Summer Youth Employment Program has been the cause of so many young people being employed, and in some cases it may help to slow down the cycle of the welfare generation. It gives us ideas, training for possible future employment, and it gives us a better idea of what we need to do to accomplish our future. Please help us to keep what has been proven to be a wonderful chance to understand what is expected from us as adults. It has given us a great source of self-pride in our abilities to contribute and know what this is — that this is a great start in life. And with your support in us, you have also given us hope that you believe in all of us. We need this opportunity to prove that we are serious about our future, and need your consideration to allow us this Program to continue. That's it. Congressman Sanders: Can you tell us what kind of work you did in the Summer Youth Employment Program? Answer: I've been on the Youth Program for two years now. And, the first year I worked at Project Independence, which is helping elderly people take care of themselves and entertain them. And last summer, I cleaned the elementary school of Williamstown to get [it] ready for school. Answer: I've only been in this for one year, which was last year, but I worked with Amber at the elementary school cleaning, and I thought it was a really great thing, because a lot of people that are inexperienced, like under 16, [employers] don't want to hire you * * * Answer: I worked at a hospital as a spot clerk in the basement, and I was in the program for one year. It was a very good skill because I'm going to be working at a hospital after I graduate. Congressman Sanders: So I think what you're seeing here is an example of a Federal program which meant a lot to you three, and to tens and tens of thousands of other young Americans. Answer: Yes. Congressman Sanders: There is a major debate taking place in Congress right now, as to whether this fund, with this program, should continue to be funded. I prefer, strongly, that it should; but we're fighting against people who prefer to put money into airplanes and bombers that the Pentagon doesn't need, rather than in programs like this. So, I thank you very much for personalizing one of the major debates taking place in Congress. Thank you.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Tedra Guyett and Harmony Hariman, high school students from Washington County, VT, who were speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
My name is Harmony Hariman, and I'm a Student Area Coordinator for Amnesty International, and I'm an intern with the Vermont Refugee Assistance. My name is Tedra Guyette; I'm also a Student Area Coordinator for Vermont, and I'm also an intern with Vermont Refugee Assistance. The first thing we really want to talk about is a Bill that was passed on March 21st in the House, HR 2202. That's really upsetting to me, because it effectively banned people who have genuine political claims . . . from ever entering the U.S., or ever staying, because . . . When a person flees their country with the fear of safety, and they come here, do you think they're going to come off the plane and say, "Whoops, we better get a lawyer and file some papers?" No, they're worried about their safety. And often spend months trying to save their families, and just getting settled, which pretty much bans them from ever filing. The Bill HR 2202 would ensure that any immigrant or refugee who is caught entering or crossing the border illegally will be permanently barred from ever legally entering the country. Yet there are instances where a refugee has no other option. Immigrants lack knowledge about specific opportunities of become a citizen, and often do not understand the process itself, or how to negotiate the I.N.S. bureaucracy. There is a section of the bill that says that immigrants who are here illegally, or undocumented immigrants, are unable to receive health care through out public system. And there's a myth that the reason that the health care system is in the ground is because it's the immigrants, it's the poor people that are just dragging it down. But really, immigrants use health care less than the general public. A 1992 U.S. Dept. of Justice report found that immigrants use federally funded services less than the general population, and there have been several studies that show that it's not immigrants that are pulling us down, it's everyone else's stupidity and ignorance about the immigrants. Most hospital care costs for undocumented immigrants were paid by private insurance, which was 47%; or by the immigrants and their families themselves, which was 45%. That only leaves 8% of the immigrants in the country that were paid for by the government. This Bill would also deny immigrants benefits under any means-tested programs funded by the federal government, or by state government, as well as being ineligible to receive grants, to receive Earned Income tax credits, to receive SSI benefits, Medicaid, Food Stamps, housing assistance, unemployment benefits, college financial aid, among others. Although, undocumented immigrants alone paid $7 billion per year in taxes. In 1990, undocumented immigrants paid $2.7 billion in Social Security, and $160 million in Unemployment Insurance; and this is according to a publication by the Urban Institute. (signal) I'm just going to do a quick story about a man that I know. He's 18 years old, and is from Sudan, and is now lost in the "war zone" of the American immigration system. He's actually living in Woodbury; he is apparently some kind of dangerous criminal because he came here with a false passport; so, now he's in jail, and the first time I met him I asked him, "Well, how long will you be here?" meaning, how long would he be staying with family that he was staying with. And he misinterpreted me to mean, "How long will you be in the U.S.," and just said, "immigration," and shrugged his shoulders. And that was probably the saddest thing I've ever seen in my life, was this man-just lost. Due to time restrictions, we are unable to address all the myths and . . . overstatements, but I can say that to blame immigrants is to scapegoat an easy, unpopular target, and to divert responsbility from more proper parties. Congressman Sanders: Thank you very much. Let me ask you a couple of questions: what does political asylum mean, and why is that important? Answer. Well, to me, it means someone who because of their benefits, because of their actions, needs to flee their home, needs to leave, whether it's because they were against their government in this country . . . like the [last] girl was saying, or the wrong color, in the wrong country; come to a place where they can be safe, where they can wake up in the morning and know that, "okay, nobody's going to shoot me today." That's what asylum means. Congressman Sanders: Okay. Were you immigrants? Answer. Yes, my family was . . . [there's] a history of immigrants in my family. Answer. Being that we are white, I think we are all immigrants, in this country. Congressman Sanders: so, essentially what you're saying is that everybody other than the Native Americans are immigrants if we are in this country? Answer. That's true. Answer. That's correct. Congressman Sanders: Okay. Thank you very much — excellent presentation.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Andrea Jaquith, a high school student from Brattleboro, VT, who was speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
The phenomenon of gangs and gang violence is widespread throughout this country, and is spreading rapidly and fast becoming a societal problem of great magnitude. Some people blame the gang problems on the poverty that this country is struggling with. With the possible exception of some states in the Northeast, every state now has some sort of gang problem. In 1961, there were about 23 cities in the U.S. with known street gangs. Today, there are at least 187 different cities with known street gangs. In 1992, there were an estimated 4,881 gangs in the U.S. L.A. County in California is the gang capital of the nation. In 1991, there were 150,000 persons in 1,000 gangs in L.A. County. John Pole of Emerge Magazine said, "If you could eliminate the narcotics problem tomorrow, you would still have a significant gang problem. If the next day you eliminated the gang problem, you'd still have a significant crack problem." Guns, "gas traps" or "toolies"--whatever you choose to call them — firearms are a major part of gangs and violence, in general, today with American youths. Gunshot wounds are the leading cause of death for all teenage boys in America. Guns kill 14 kids in America every day. It is estimated that one out of 25 African-American male children now in kindergarten will be murdered with a gun by the age of 18. In a recent survey conducted, it was found that one in five H.S. students carry a weapon with them. The vast majority of juveniles get guns from their own homes, and the majority of accidental shootings occur in homes where kids can easily get guns. In a 1989 poll, nearly three out of five Americans own a gun. So many youths have firearms because of the perceived absence of any other kind of power necessary to attain status and wealth. 5,000 kids are killed by a gun every year in the U.S. There's a trend that appears to be a weak economy and scarcity of legitimate jobs for these young minority men-- that's why they tend to join gangs. Basic needs that kids get by joining gangs are: structure, nurturing, economic opportunity and a sense of belonging. Most kids join gangs because that's what there is to join where they live — there aren't sports teams that they can join, and there aren't jobs that they can get because of the weak economy — so that's why they turn to gangs. There are two well-known gangs in Western U.S.; they're known as the "Crips" and the "Bloods;" the Crips and the Bloods are rivals in the Western U.S.--the Crips wear blue and the Bloods wear red. There is a lot hatred between these two gangs; a Blood will not ask for a cigarette because the word begins with a c,' as in Crips. Instead, they ask for a figarette." Parents are very fearful for their children's lives when they go out to play or go to school; if they are caught wearing the wrong colors, they could be misinterpreted for belonging to a gang, and get hurt or killed. Parents dress their children carefully in brown, yellow or other neutral colors, and they avoid buying British Nike's brand sneakers, because the initials have come to mean "bloodkiller," a sign of disrespect in a Blood neighborhood. Nearly 50% of the Black male population age 21 through 24 is involved in some sort of gang activity. More than 200,000 people live in South Central L.A., and most have turned their homes into what look like jails: heavy metal- grid bars across the windows and doors, their yards turned into military compounds with wrought-iron fences, etc. They do this to protect their property, their family and themselves from gangs involvement. Solutions to ending the gang problems of the U.S. are difficult to come up with. Trying to attract the interest of teenagers is also hard to do. Some suggestions have been: recreational activities for the students to participate in after school so they can stay off the streets. A way to bring teenagers into the picture of helping out is by way of teacher training. They need training to recognize gang members (signal), and discourage their activities. Other than recreational activities, there should be also an alternative for those nonathletic students. There should be tighter security — security officers at schools to deal with troublesome students; increased discipline would mean stricter enforcement of existing disciplinary rules. Metal detectors are also a way of weeding out weapons, and in some schools there's a truancy court that deals with people with high absenteeism. There is also . . . alternative schools with programs for disciplinary problem children. Former gang members participate in community awareness campaigns. And one last solution would be to control the unemployment by making . . . more jobs available for students and young people. Congressman Sanders: Andrea, thank you very much; that was excellent. I'd like to ask you a very brief question, one question: in your judgment, has the government or other interests done a good job of controlling or eliminating youth gangs in America? Answer. I don't think so, because there's a lot of unemployment out there, and that's why these teens are turning to gangs, because they don't have anything to do. So I think that the government should create more jobs for the students to get involved with. Congressman Sanders: Are you familiar with the Summer Youth Employment Program? Answer. A little bit. Congressman Sanders: The Summer Youth Employment Program is a Federal program which allows low- and middle-income students to have summer jobs. It's a very important program, in districts such as you were speaking about in Los Angeles, where unemployment is very high. One of the things that I should tell you, a little bit sadly, is we were fighting this fight, but we think that the leadership in Congress is going to eliminate the funding for the Summer Youth Employment Program, which I think addresses some of the concerns that you've raised.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by several high school students at Champlain Valley Union High School in Vermont, who were speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
Through our high school years, we have discovered the power and voice that we as students have in our school; and we have realized that this power of student voice is an incredibly valuable and meaningful learning experience. It's important to recognize that education reform, especially when it concerns the students that say their education . . . can be very slow. And we hope that some of the ideas that we present today will be a springboard for further action on the part of both students in the audience as well as for Vermont. It's our hope that . . . we be more of a voice, both in schools and on a national level. And, for that reason, our presentation is both for Congressman Sanders and for the teachers and the students in the audience. We believe that student voice is fundamental to provide the necessary quality of education to our nation's youth. Student voice empowers our students, instilling confidence and providing opportunities for participation in the democratic process. Student voice gives students control over their own education, getting them interested and excited about it, and making it more meaningful. Student voice improves the tone and level of respect among students, teachers and administration and other members of the school community, building a stronger community. Incorporating student voice into the educational experience is a tool for developing contributing members of a democratic society. We attended a national conference last November, where we came together with students and teachers from across the country re: policy changes for student voice. And we came up with a general policy at that conference. This first handout that we've given Congressman Sanders (and if anyone else we would like to copy, we'll have them available afterwards) is kind of our own version of general policy that we created. It's something you can bring back to your own schools, and share with other people. The following is the policy: School government: schools should incorporate a democratic decision-making process where all students can be recognized; all people in the school community should have equal opportunity to be heard; there should be a commitment to building this process by making it accessible, and by providing students and staff with the time necessary to plan and implement the school's plan of action. For curriculum, students need to have a voice in what and how they learn; open dialogue should exist between teachers and students, about teacher and student evaluation. For school tone and culture: a school should have an atmosphere that reflects its values of student empowerment; this includes allowing students to help shape the atmosphere of the school; the climate of the school should be one of open communication between all its members; students and faculty should feel equally comfortable in discussing concerns and suggestions. The first step towards creating a school culture that allows for Student Voice lies within each individual, and . . . we want to stress that each person is responsible for speaking out, and listening, and encouraging the voice of others. The school atmosphere should reflect the democratic ideals of our society. In an ideal world, as well as a democracy, every person has a voice, and so each person's voice should be listened to and respected. And the most important thing is "how" and "what can you do;" and that's the second handout that we have available if you want it. (signal) We're just going to go through reading this is all. Here are some suggestions: Create more funding for education; let's think about the future; if students are empowered today, we will be prepared tomorrow to contribute to society in an active and productive way. But this cannot be accomplished on a shoestring budget. . . . What is more important than education, what is more important than our future? Encourage students to teach each other; everyone is good at something; finding strengths build upon them by creating opportunities for students to teach their peers. Through this teaching process, students will gain confidence in leadership skills. Invite students to serve on national committees and panels concerning education skills. Create positions for students to advise the Secretary of Education: a student representative in Washington. And the final suggestion today: create charters for student rights within your local schools, and send these charters to other schools, and encourage them to create their own charters. Let's begin a grassroots Student Voice Movement. (APPLAUSE) Congressman Sanders: I would strongly encourage all of the schools here to get copies of these very excellent documents. The second I'd like to ask you: to what degree are these principles in existence now at CVU — are they in existence? Answer. I think we're here because we have gotten these principles from our school and from our education; and that's not to say that every student at CVU has gotten the same things that we have. I think that our school does an excellent job of providing opportunities for students, but it doesn't do quite as well in making . . . sure that all students realize and recognize that opportunity. Congressman Sanders: Let me ask you the last question: in the last election nationally, only 38% of the American people came out to vote. What do you see as the relationship between student democracy and democracy within our country as a whole? Answer. It's building on the future; if we start in schools. The problem with our democracy today is that as students grow up in our educational system, they don't learn that much about it. Then once they get out there into the real world they haven't had very much practice with it, and don't know what to do. One of the best ways to remedy that problem is to start dealing with democracy in the schools.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by several high school students at Peoples Academy in Vermont, who were speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
Our topic is: changing the education system. We don't have any great solutions, or anything, but we just want to increase the awareness of the fact that there's too much emphasis put on getting good grades, and having a good score. And the desire to learn is gone; or if it's not gone, it's not there very much, or whatever. The result of this is that students just go through school just . . . playing the motions, getting good grades, having tests, memorizing and they're not necessarily learning anything; or discovering . . . how they are self-learners, like what is the best way for them to learn, which they can carry with them throughout life. Another thing that we think is that teachers seem bored. They're teaching the same thing again and again and again, and . . . becomes monotonous; it makes learning more of a chore. . . . Along the same lines, we think that perhaps there could be more courses — there's a lot of courses out there that are trying to help teachers learn how to become better educators; but many times the teachers themselves don't have the desire to become better educated. If those teachers could, instead of going to classes and things like that and learning how, we could find the teachers that are considered good teachers, that actually want to help someone . . . I dare say, that the majority of people that become teachers don't necessarily become a teacher and say, "Well, I want to go out there and help better the education of our youth, and . . . become better people. They say, "This'll be a good paycheck for me. And that's another thing that is a real problem with the way the system is set up right now: that money and getting a good paycheck is how things are judged by, and if you want to become a doctor, or whatever, it's not because you want to help cure disease, it's because you want a BMW. And, if these things are taught in the school, then that's obviously how it's going to be presented, but if we could . . . help people understand what they would enjoy doing, and less emphasis on money. Perhaps trying to help people understand that, "Well, hey, money's not the only thing out there, you know, you've got to go to a job 40 hrs./week, making $50,000/yr., and hate my job, that's not something that's going to make your life happy. So, if we could change things, and help . . . people understand that you have to want to learn; you need to understand what you need to go out and learn about yourself. And this is going to help in the school system also, because if someone's enjoying what they're learning, they're going to actually go out and do it themselves; they're going to be interested. I dare say that some people, if not most people are here today because it's for a class; they have to be here for a class, not because they're interested in the political system, but because it's a break. And if that's going to be the way things are, then nobody's going to be happy in their life; and that's a bigger issue than simply educating. (APPLAUSE) We also feel that . . . you shouldn't have as many required courses; you have a four-year English requirement to graduate, and had my 4th year of English, and just sat through my English classes — I couldn't wait until it was over, I didn't learn much of anything, I just got by. I think that there should be more elective classes that you can take, that you're interested in, so that you have more interest to learn, I think that would be better for the students. Along the same lines also, that it is a major problem how general the courses are . . . The general courses are made to expose us to a lot of things, so that we can try to find out what we enjoy. But instead, it actually decreases that, because the system that's presented is looked at as something that's not enjoyable. So a kid — maybe does enjoy reading, but perhaps the way it's presented isn't for him. So, he may go away thinking, "I'm no good at English, I can't get it right." But that's not necessarily the case. It may be that the system that the English is being presented [in] is the problem. So you need to look at that, it's more than just looking at, "Well, he's just a bad student."

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Jackie Frazier, Kate Greanon, Kay Gerson, Drew McNaughton, Kate McQuillen, Jennifer Arner, Lucas D'Amico, and Charley Hart, high school students from Vermont, who were speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
For the record, my name is Jackie Frazier, this is Kay Gerson, Kate McQuillen, and Drew McNaughton. Our discussion is actually, "Overcrowding, or Budget [Problems] and Education." (Alternating speakers): We've been asked to directly discuss problems that arise within our school, and our students participating in school for seven years — being in a high school — and the problem that most prominently arises for us was the overcrowding problem in our school. What all of you may not know, is that we have 5 districts that come to our school, and we also have people that are paying tuition to come here. As most schools are having a problem with budget now, unless they live — earlier, someone was discussing how in . . . a resort town, they have more money to put into a school system. We have 5 towns, and this school was actually built at one time to support around 750 students; at this point in time, we have close to 910 people, which is not that much over, but each year we are increasing. Two years ago, we had a class of about 80 students, my class is about 130, the upcoming class of 7th grade next year will have around 170; I think it's a substantial increase each year. If you were to look at a town in your report, you'll see that each year we are increasing drastically in the number of students, but we don't have the budget to increase either space or more teachers. Sometimes we have to actually hold classes in this auditorium, over on the side here, and in the small media room upstairs, which is normally held for just movies. Each year as the budget stays the same, and the capacity stays the same, the students go up; and what we'd like to discuss, and we have a movie to show you, is that each year when the amount of students do go up, the actual grade of the school goes down in standard: in the way we survive, in the air we breathe, and in the rooms that populate. Sometimes the student ratio is 30 students to one teacher, when ideally it's 20:1. So, each time that we do this, we want to show you how it looks, in reality. Can everyone hear me? (narrating as video is shown): Due to the reduced janitorial staff over the past few years, and increased student population we see an overall depreciation of the physical condition of the school. There is no classroom space available; this American History class uses a corner of the auditorium as a makeshift classroom for one period each day. One of our stairwells . . . This was . . . one of the Junior High classrooms, and . . . you can see, there are many classrooms in the school which have a severe overcrowding problem. A high school classroom, with a ratio of about 30:1. All right, so that was a video to show visually what's the matter with it. Now, I want to talk about what the funds are directed towards, instead of building maintenance. By 1997, the future budget is planning on increasing itself by $617,000, and $409,940 of which is going to Special Ed. programs. I think if Special Ed. is increasing itself by 85%, and while all of this is going on, U-32 High School is going rapidly down. We already mentioned the American History class, and how it's held over there; but there's also a Spanish class upstairs that has 30 students in it, and the rooms about as big as about a third of this stage. We're all cramped together in it — it decreases individualized . . . one-on-one help with a teacher, so they fall behind, and they can't catch up. The ventilation problem in the school, you've probably already noticed; so when one student gets sick, the whole student body gets sick. So I think on a national scale, U-32 is the representation of the problem, in that . . . we're supposed to be a world power, and I don't think our schools should be run this way. It's a bad way to represent our country.

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues I would like to have printed in the Record this statement by Ajah Leas, Eli Stokes, Kyja Page, Ken Bramlett, B.J. King, high school students are Peoples Academy in Vermont, who were speaking at my recent town meeting on issues facing young people.
Our topic is: changing the education system. We don't have any great solutions, or anything, but we just want to increase the awareness of the fact that there's too much emphasis put on getting good grades, and having a good score. And the desire to learn is gone; or if it's not gone, it's not there very much, or whatever. The result of this is that students just go through school just playing the motions, getting good grades, having tests, memorizing and they're not necessarily learning anything; or discovering how they are self-learners, like what is the best way for them to learn, which they can carry with them throughout life. Another thing that we think is that teachers seem bored. They're teaching the same thing again and again and again, and they need to teach something different, to put themselves into it, because it becomes monotonous; it makes learning more of a chore. Along the same lines, we think that perhaps there could be more courses — there's a lot of courses out there that are trying to help teachers learn how to become better educators; but many times the teachers themselves don't have the desire to become better educated. If those teachers could, instead of going to classes and things like that and learning how, we could find the teachers that are considered good teachers, that actually want to help someone. I dare say, that the majority of people that become teachers don't necessarily become a teacher and say, "Well, I want to go out there and help better the education of our youth, and become better people. They say, "This'll be a good paycheck for me. And that's another thing that is a real problem with the way the system is set up right now: that money and getting a good paycheck is how things are judged by, and if you want to become a doctor, or whatever, it's not because you want to help cure disease, it's because you want a BMW. And, if these things are taught in the school, then that's obviously how it's going to be presented, but if we could . . . help people understand what they would enjoy doing, and less emphasis on money. Perhaps trying to help people understand that, "Well, hey, money's not the only thing out there, you know, you've got to go to job 40 hrs./week, making $50,000/yr., and hate my job, that's not something that's going to make your life happy. So, if we could change things, and help . . . people understand that you have to want to learn; you need to understand what you need to go out and learn about yourself. And this is going to help in the school system also, because if someone's enjoying what they're learning, they're going to actually go out and do it themselves; they're going to be interested. I dare say that some people, if not most people are here today because it's for a class; they have to be here for a class, not because they're interested in the political system, but because it's a break. And if that's going to the way things are, then nobody's going to be happy in their life; and that's a bigger issue than simply educating. (Applause). We also feel that you shouldn't have as many required courses; you have a four-year English requirement to graduate, and had my 4th year of English, and just sat through my English classes — I couldn't wait until it was over, I didn't learn much of anything, I just got by. I think that there should be more elective classes that you can take, that you're interested in, so that you have more interest to learn, I think that would be better for the students. Along the same lines also, that it is a major problem how general the courses are. The general courses are made to expose us to a lot of things, so that we can try to find out what we enjoy. But instead, it actually decreases that, because the system that's presented is looked at as something that's not enjoyable. So a kid — maybe he does enjoy reading, but perhaps the way it's presented isn't for him. So, he may go away thinking, "I'm no good at English, I can't get it right." But that's not necessarily the case. It may be that the system that the English is being presented [in] the problem. So you need to look at that, it's more than just looking at, "Well, he's just a bad student."

If the gentleman will yield, Mr. Chairman, that is correct.

Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the last word.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the gentleman from New Jersey [Mr. Smith] for his strong efforts and willingness to work with us on this very important amendment, and also point out that the gentleman from Minnesota [Mr. Minge], the gentleman from Oregon [Mr. DeFazio] and the gentleman from Wisconsin [Mr. Neumann] are also cosponsors and working with us on this effort.
Mr. Chairman, let me begin by thanking the chairman, Mr. Young, and the ranking member, Mr. Murtha, and all the Members of the House for the support that they gave me last year for an amendment which I successfully offered, which stopped the disgrace of the Pentagon providing a $32-million bonus for the CEO's and board members of Martin-Marietta for their merger, and that is a merger which ended up laying off at least 19,000 American workers.
Well, if my colleagues think the $32 million was a waste of taxpayers' dollars, then they better listen up, because what the gentleman from New Jersey [Mr. Smith] and I are talking about today amounts to billions of dollars. Yes, the taxpayers are providing payoffs for layoffs. We are actually giving multibillion-dollar corporations huge amounts of money in order to merge their companies, stifle competition, and lay off American workers. This is an absurd policy, it is a disgraceful policy, it is the worst kind of corporate welfare, and it is a policy that we should end today.
Mr. Chairman, the Members who have come together to sponsor the Smith-Sanders amendment have different philosophical points of view, but we are in agreement that it is absurd that the U.S. Government is providing billions of dollars in taxpayer subsidies to huge profitable corporations so that they can merge and then lay off tens of thousands of American workers. That makes no sense to anyone.
Mr. Chairman, this amendment has widespread support. It is supported by the Taxpayers for Common Sense, the CATO Institute, the Project on Government Oversight, and also supported by Lawrence J. Korb, the former Under Secretary of Defense under President Reagan.
Mr. Chairman, there are a number of reasons why we should support this amendment. First, we have a $5-trillion national debt. We should not be providing billions of dollars in subsidies to large corporations to lay off American workers. Second of all, we have received almost no documentation from these companies as to what they are doing. What they are saying basically is, "Don't worry, give us the money, trust us, we're going to save the government money." At the very least, we must have a clear outline of the net savings, and we want to know what savings will be effectuated.
Mr. Chairman, if we can believe this, the Pentagon has never submitted any of the annual reports required by law on this program, and the first report was scheduled to be due in November 1995. It has never been filed.
Mr. Chairman, in August 1995 the GAO began their own investigation in spite of the inaction of the Pentagon. The GAO's first and only report on the two companies that applied for and received these payments stated that, and I quote, the contractor's proposed savings were based entirely on work force reductions, end quote.
The GAO also found that in exchange for free taxpayer cash up front, the same companies — FMC Corp. and Harsco Corp. BMY — projected out-year savings fell 85 percent short of what they originally presented to DOD. Further, the GAO reported that only one hearing has ever been held on a policy the GAO has said could cost, quote, several billions of dollars. The GAO also reported that 32 contractors have already lined up and put in requests to receive merger subsidies. One hearing. Billions of dollars.
Third, Mr. Chairman, we can agree about the wisdom or lack of wisdom of industrial policy, but I think everybody here understands that it makes no sense for the government to get involved in the private sector so that we can lose American jobs. That is insane.
I would support industrial policy if it created decent-paying jobs. Some in this body would not support any industrial policy. The thing they must ask themselves is why is the government selecting certain very large corporations and saying to them, quote, the taxpayers are going to help your company engender certain efficiencies, end quote.
Essentially what the Pentagon is doing is saying to this company, "We're going to help you, we're not going to help the other company." They are encouraging mergers. I think there is a lot to be discussed in terms of this whole issue.
Last, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that at a time when real wages in this country for working people are in decline, at a time when people are scared to death about whether or not they are going to have their decent paying jobs, they do not want to see their tax dollars going to large multibillion-dollar corporations so that these companies can then merge and lay off American workers.
The CHAIRMAN. The time of the gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders] has expired.
(By unanimous consent, Mr. Sanders was allowed to proceed for 1 additional minute.)

In fact, Mr. Chairman, we should be standing in opposition to that policy. Our tax dollars should not be going to that policy. Imagine the worker from Lockheed-Martin who has been laid off because of the merger saying, "My tax dollars went to laying me off and to hurt my family." That makes no sense.

Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the requisite number of words.
Mr. Chairman, I yield to the gentleman from California [Mr. Farr].

Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment and I ask unanimous consent it be considered out of order.
The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.

Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the requisite number of words.

Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the requisite number of words, and in support of the amendment.
Mr. Chairman, it is a national disgrace that large numbers of people in this country, including many elderly people, go cold in the wintertime. That is not what this country is supposed to be about. It is especially stupid that we have a situation where people are living in extremely energy inefficient homes. They lack storm windows, they have cracks in their walls, and they have inadequate heating systems so that the little amount of money that they have that goes into heat ends up being used very inefficiently.
The weatherization program is an intelligent, cost-effective program. It saves money and it helps a lot of people. I commend the authors of the amendment.

Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the last word.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to do two things. First, I would like to enter a colloquy with the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Regula], and then I am going to offer an amendment.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into a colloquy with Mr. Regula regarding an issue that is very important to the State of Vermont and others interested in conservation and sustainable agriculture. Unfortunately, this bill does not provide funding for the Marsh-Billing National Historic Park that is located in Woodstock, VT. The planned opening for this park is 1998, and the administration's budget included $340,000 in startup funding.
My understanding is that the gentleman would support funding for this historic park should the Senate include funds specifically for this purpose.

Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
The CHAIRMAN. The clerk will designate the amendment.

Mr. Chairman, reserving the right to object, I understand it is going to be a very short period of time, is that right?

Mr. Chairman, I withdraw my reservation of objection.
The CHAIRMAN. Is the gentleman from Michigan offering his amendment or just seeking time?

Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.

Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to be offering this amendment, along with its cosponsor, the gentleman from Maine [Mr. Longley]. The amendment is very simple. It transfers $11.764 million from the Naval Petroleum Reserve into the Low Income Weatherization Assistance Program. Last year the weatherization program was hit very hard and was slashed almost in half. Now this bill recommends an additional 10 percent cut on top of last year's decimating cut. Please join us in sending a message that the proposed cut is just too deep.
This is a compromise amendment. The administration requested an increase of funding to $150 million. The committee recommends $100 million. This amendment puts it at about $112 million. The amendment is supported by a broad and varied coalition, the American Public Power Association, U.S. PIRG, the Environmental Defense Fund, and the National Community Action Foundation.
Weatherization funds save money. That is the important point to make. It is a very cost-effective program. Weatherization funds help pay for updating decrepit heating and cooling systems. identifying deadly carbon monoxide leaks and faulty fuel systems, insulating drafty homes, and educating homeowners on energy efficiency. Weatherization funds save money. It is a good, cost-effective investment.
Let me say a few words about the Naval Petroleum Reserve. The NPR's operating funds go to running three oil fields which are jointly operated by the Government and Chevron. The productivity of these fields has been steadily declining since its peak in 1976. The President earmarked the NPR for sale in fiscal year 1997, indicating, "Producing oil and gas is a commercial, not a governmental activity, which is more appropriately performed by the private sector."
That is something that many of my friends on the other side I am sure agree with. Congress apparently agreed, because it passed legislation authorizing the sale of NPR by 1998. The budget resolution that we recently passed recommends that the sale occur as soon as possible. Mr. Chairman, this is a very important amendment. There are millions of people in this country who simply do not have the resources to keep warm in the wintertime. They need help. Taking the money from the NPR is a good way to do that. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.

Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Sheila Jackson-Lee.

Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Ms. DeLauro].

Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from New York [Mr. Hinchey].

Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from Wisconsin [Mr. Obey].

Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Chairman, I would remind my friend that Chevron has stated that it could cut operating costs by a minimum of $30 to $40 million and extend its producing life, which would ultimately boost revenues.
Most importantly, Mr. Chairman, what we are talking about is that in this great country, the United States of America, there are millions of people who face cold in the wintertime. This is not a question of putting storm windows on; this is a question of maintaining a shred of dignity for low-income senior citizens who just do not have enough money to keep their homes warm and who are living in houses where all of the warmth is running out of deteriorating roofs and walls.
What kind of society are we when we cannot take care of and keep warm the weakest and most vulnerable amongst us? We are talking about $11 million, that is all we are talking about, to keep people warm in America, to keep people from dying in Chicago when the weather there goes above 100 degrees. I do not think that is asking too much.

Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote, and pending that, I make a point of order that a quorum is not present.
The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to House Resolution 455, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders] will be postponed.
The point of no quorum is considered withdrawn.
Are there further amendments?

Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote.
The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to House Resolution 472, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Colorado [Mr. Hefley] will be postponed.

Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.

Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chairman, as many Members know, the U.S. taxpayer is the single largest supporter of biomedical research in the world, spending $33 billion in 1994 alone for biomedical and related health research. Unfortunately, our taxpayers are unwittingly being forced to pay twice for drugs because this Congress is deeply beholden to the very profitable giant drug companies.
Members heard it right, our constituents are not getting a fair return on the investment of their hard-earned money, paying twice for pharmaceutical breakthroughs, first as taxpayers and second as consumers. This harms consumers, and it is a form of corporate welfare to many of the world's largest corporations.
The bottom line of this amendment is that when taxpayers spend billions and billions of dollars in developing a new drug, the taxpayer as a consumer should get a break and we should not be giving all of this research over to the private industry who then sells the product to our consumers at outrageous profits.

Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from Florida [Mrs. Thurman].

Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman from California [Mr. Rohrabacher].

Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Rhode Island [Mr. Kennedy].

Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment, number 14.
The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.

Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chairman, I intend to withdraw this amendment, and I believe I will be entering into a colloquy with the majority leader in a moment, but before I do that I want to talk about what this amendment is about and why we offered it.
This amendment touches on an issue that is of growing consequence to tens of millions of Americans as this country moves from traditional health care to HMO's and to managed care. What this amendment deals with is the need to break the gag rules that are being imposed by insurance companies and HMO's on our physicians and how they relate to their patients.
It seems to me pretty clear that if a doctor-patient relationship means anything, that when we walk into the doctor's office we want to know that our physician is being honest with us, is telling us all of the options that are available to us. We do not want to see that our physicians cannot tell us an option because an HMO or an insurance company might think that that option is too expensive and that that insurance company has told the doctor not to convey that option to us. That is not what the doctor-patient relationship is supposed to be about.
That is what my amendment deals with, specifically with Medicare and Medicaid. The fact of the matter is there is a bill moving past the House, gaining widespread support, offered by the gentleman from Iowa [Mr. Ganske] and the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Markey], which addresses this issue and makes it broader. It goes beyond Medicare and Medicaid, dealing with all health care providers, and I strongly support that bill.
Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute and 15 seconds to the gentleman from New York [Mr. Nadler].

Mr. Chairman, I thank the majority leader very much for his comments, and I ask unanimous consent to withdraw my amendment.

Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of this legislation, a fitting tribute to Mollie Beattie, a leader in wilderness protection.
This legislation is especially important to me because Mollie Beattie was a Vermonter and the State of Vermont was lucky enough to benefit from her work long before she became the first woman to direct the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Her extensive list of accomplishments has benefited wildlife habitat areas, State parks, wetlands, and forests in Vermont and across the Nation.
This legislation recognizes the contribution that Mollie Beattie made to the environment and the pristine wilderness that graces our Nation. The designation will remind all of us of her strong defense of the environment and remind us that we need to do our own part in protecting it.
It was a great loss when Mollie Beattie was taken from this earth she loved so much when she died of brain cancer on June 27, 1996. I urge your support for this bill that provides a suitable tribute to her work.

Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
The text of the amendment is as follow:
Amendment offered by Mr. Sanders: Page 119, after line 8, insert the following new title:
The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the order of the House of Tuesday, July 16, 1996, the gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders] will be recognized for 10 minutes in support of his amendment and a Member in opposition will be recognized for 10 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders].

Mr. Chairman, I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. Coburn], a cosponsor of this amendment, and I ask unanimous consent that he be allowed to control that time.
The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Vermont?

Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chairman, this amendment is substantively the same as an amendment No. 5 in the July 16, 1996, Congressional Record but it incorporates a technical change which I believe makes our intent clearer.
The amendment that I am offering today with the gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. Coburn] along with the gentleman from New York [Mr. Nadler] and the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Weldon] touches on an issue of enormous consequence to millions of Americans, especially given the rapid transmission we are experiencing from traditional health insurance to managed care and HMO's. We can all agree on the need to control health care costs. However, we must also ensure that health care decisions which affect our lives and our well-being are made by physicians using medical rationale and who have the best interests of their patients at heart and not by insurance companies who may be putting their drive for profits before the best interests of their patients. Most importantly, Mr. Chairman, we must preserve the fundamental core of successful health care, and, that is, the doctor-patient relationship.
When a patient walks into a doctor's office, he or she must be 100 percent confident that the treatment that is being recommended comes from the doctor's best medical judgment and is not motivated by an insurance company's desire for greater profits.
A patient deserves to be told the full truth when going to a doctor and that is what this amendment is all about.
Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. Coburn] is recognized for 5 minutes.

Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman from New York [Mr. Nadler].

Mr. Chairman, I yield 10 seconds to the gentleman from Maryland [Mr. Hoyer].

Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Chairman, I think we are all in agreement, those of us who have spoken, about what the issue here is, and it is not a complicated issue. What all of us believe is that when a patient walks into a doctor's office, we want to know that we are getting the best possible treatment that we can get and that there is not a perverse incentive being offered to the physician to give us less than the best quality care that can be offered.
We do not want to believe that a physician can make more money by offering us lesser care. That is not what health care is supposed to be about and, most importantly, that is not what the doctor-patient relationship is supposed to be about. If there is any relationship built on trust in our society, it is supposed to be the doctor-patient relationship, and historically that has been the case.
What this amendment does, it applies to Federal employees what already exists in law for Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and it says that there cannot be perverse incentives offered to physicians so that they do not provide Federal employees the best quality care available.
I thank all of the cosponsors for this amendment and look forward to the body's support.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
The CHAIRMAN. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders].

Mr. Speaker, in a time when this Congress is proposing huge cuts in Medicare, and Medicaid, and education, environmental protection, veterans programs, it is absolutely insane that we continue to provide $125 billion a year in corporate welfare, tax breaks and subsidies which go to some of the largest, the most profitable corporations in America, and that is why I am delighted that last month legislation which I offered with the gentleman from New Jersey [Mr. Smith] passed this body and would take a major bite out of one of the most outrageous examples of corporate welfare, and that is the billions of dollars in Pentagon subsidies which taxpayers are providing to huge defense contractors, subsidies which, if my colleagues can believe it, are providing incentives to merge their companies and in the process lay off tens of thousands of American workers.
Yes, that is what we are doing: Taxpayer subsidies are going for payoffs for layoffs, to lay off tens of thousands of American workers.
Mr. Speaker, while this important legislation passed the House unfortunately it did not pass the Senate, and it will be going to conference committee. My hope is that this body will urge our conferees to say no to payoffs, for layoffs.

