I yield myself 15 minutes of the time controlled by the Democrats.

Mr. President, yesterday I was in Rome and Watertown, NY, to speak with members of the Rotary Clubs and chambers of commerce about the upstate New York economy and how we can work together to promote investment and job creation in these communities. I will carry their concerns about the economy to the Budget Committee on which I am pleased to serve and where we are fashioning the framework for the next Federal budget.
We are hearing about surplus projections and words of caution, about how much faith to place in them. We are hearing about President Bush's tax cut plans and words of caution from colleagues who voted for big tax cuts in the early 1980s, cuts which helped contribute to the ruinous deficits and high interest rates that hobbles our Nation's capacity to create jobs, invest in people, and pay down our national debt. The budget resolution we create sets the stage for how much we can invest in health care, schools, and the other pressing needs of families throughout our country. Later this week, I will return to the floor to talk about the budget in greater detail.
Today I would like to discuss a topic that transcends party, geography, and ideology. It is an issue that is important to the people in Rome and Watertown, Rochester and Brooklyn, and everywhere I have been in recent weeks. It will be foremost in my mind as the outlines of the 2002 budget take shape; that is, improving access to quality, affordable health care for New Yorkers, for all Americans, and especially for our children.
In this session of Congress, we will need to focus on many aspects of health care, medical privacy, Medicaid funding, genetic discrimination, providing prescription drug coverage for our seniors, and long-term care for our families, among others. Today I will talk about the importance of insuring more Americans, particularly our children, and protecting the rights of those who are insured.
In all corners of New York, I have met countless people who have told me powerful stories of the cruel inequities of our health care system. Last August, at the Dutchess County Fair, a single mother told me how hard it was to keep her family afloat because her medical bills totaled more than $30,000. She was worried she would become impoverished and forced to go on welfare.
In Massena, an uninsured woman suffering from cancer told me how much trouble she had finding a doctor who would treat her for free. In the MonteFiore Children's Emergency Room in the Bronx, I saw children who had come there for asthma treatments because they had no health coverage and, therefore, no doctor of their own. From Buffalo to Bay Shore, the people of New York have urged me to go to the Senate to fight for better health care.
Many of my colleagues will remember when I came to Capitol Hill 7 years ago with an idea or two about how to improve health care in our country. At that time, I was privileged to work with the Acting President pro tempore's father, who served not only Rhode Island, but our entire country so well for so many years. We were not successful then, but I learned some valuable lessons about the legislative process, the importance of bipartisan cooperation, and the wisdom of taking small steps to get a big job done.
The Clinton-Gore administration took such steps, and with the help of both Democrats and Republicans we made progress: the Kassebaum-Kennedy Health Insurance Portability and Protection Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the Children's Health Insurance Program, the help we gave to young people leaving the foster care system under the Chafee bill — to give them eligibility for Medicaid health coverage through their 21st birthday, ending drive-by deliveries, mental health parity, helping to prevent breast cancer by waiving cost sharing for mammography services in the Medicare program — and providing annual screening for beneficiaries age 40 and older, advances in federally funded medical research, and the human genome project.
Even with such progress, however, there are still 40 million Americans who are uninsured. Adults with health insurance are three times more likely to receive care when they need it. People with no health insurance are 50 to 70 percent more likely to be hospitalized for routine illnesses such as pneumonia. Children with no health insurance are twice as likely to be hospitalized for illnesses such as asthma and ear infections. Americans without health insurance are 4 times more likely to seek care in emergency rooms.
It has only been 3 months since my election and 6 weeks since I was sworn in, but already I have received hundreds of letters from New Yorkers urging me to help them, their families, and their neighbors get the care and coverage they need. One such letter is from Kevin Pispisa, a Boy Scout from Troop 207 in North Babylon, whose parents are nurses. Kevin wrote to me:
It seems that the poor working class do not have the means to receive adequate health care. Some of them cannot afford to go to the doctor or pay for medication that they need.
Elsie Doetsch from Binghampton wrote to tell me about her friends who are dairy farmers. She is concerned about them because, as she writes in her letter to me:
They work every day to help put the food we eat and enjoy on our tables, yet cannot afford the "luxury" of health insurance, which I feel is a necessity for anyone in their hazardous occupation.
These letters serve as an important reminder to us all as we think about President Bush's tax cut plans and as we deliberate over the shape of our new budget. We must not forget to invest in the people we represent. We must help them find affordable quality health care. Health insurance should not be a luxury; it should be a fact of life for Americans everywhere.
Let me be specific. We should expand the Children's Health Insurance Program. If we change the poverty threshold to include children and families with annual incomes up to 300 percent of the national poverty level and extend the program to parents of eligible children, we can provide health care to more than 5 million parents and nearly 2 million more children. Merely expanding CHIP, however, is not enough. We need to do more to encourage the enrollment of the 7 million children who are eligible for CHIP, or Medicaid.
I am very pleased that in New York, CHIP outreach efforts include radio PSAs in a number of languages, from Greek to Russian to Albanian to Creole to Chinese. We should provide a financial bonus to States that meet CHIP enrollment targets and reduce the CHIP-enhanced matching rate for States that fail to do so.
There are other creative ideas to provide greater access to health care for all Americans. As we consider them, I believe we should adhere to certain principles. First, we must develop policies that cover more uninsured Americans without encouraging businesses to drop or reduce their employees' health benefits. Second, we should make improvements to our health care system without setting up burdensome new Federal or State bureaucracies. Third, we should not penalize States such as New York that have been leaders in expanding coverage. Fourth, we should encourage flexibility for States to expand coverage while enacting strong accountability provisions so that taxpayer dollars are effectively invested.
As we work to expand health care coverage, we must also work to improve the quality of coverage. That is why it is past time to pass a meaningful Patients' Bill of Rights, and I am very pleased to be a cosponsor of the McCain-Edwards-Kennedy Patient Protection Act of 2001.
President Bush recently set out his principles for a Patients' Bill of Rights, and this legislation meets every one of them with only one exception: The President wants to preempt State laws that allow people to seek relief in State courts when they are injured by bad HMO decisions. That objection should not stand in the way of progress. I believe President Bush can transform the rhetoric of leadership into the reality of accomplishment by embracing this bipartisan patient protection act. Across this aisle and across our country, Democrats and Republicans are joined together in support of this Patients' Bill of Rights. Say the word, President Bush, and we can make this bill a law.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak today, and I look forward to working with my colleagues on improving the health of our Nation in the context of a budget that is balanced and prudent.
I would also like to take this occasion to pay special thanks to my predecessor, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, whose legacy of service to New York and our Nation is unparalleled and who has always been a source of inspiration, not only to me and my colleagues but to people literally around our world.
Finally, I am so grateful to the people of New York who have given me this extraordinary opportunity to serve them. Over the course of the next 6 years, I will work hard each and every day to listen to their concerns and to fight for their futures.
I thank the Chair and yield the floor.

Mr. President, as we begin our work on the 2002 budget, we find ourselves at a crossroads, facing a very big choice. The choice we make will determine whether we pay down our national debt. It will determine our investments in priorities like education, the environment, health care and Social Security. And it will define the quality of life for millions of Americans for years to come.
The choice we face is this: Do we continue along the budgetary path that we, as a Government and a nation, have followed in recent years? Or do we make a break from that path, and return to the one we followed 2 decades ago?
Let's look, for a minute, at history. Eight years ago our budget deficit was $290 billion — the largest in our history. The national debt was $3 trillion and unemployment had surged to 7.8 percent. At the time, the Congressional Budget Office predicted that the deficit would reach $513 billion by this year.
This year, the predicted deficit is, in fact, a surplus, likely to reach $281 billion. We are scheduled to pay off $600 billion of the national debt — concluding the largest three-year debt reduction in our nation's history. As Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan once said, our "commitment to fiscal discipline has been instrumental in achieving the longest expansion in the nation's history."
Now debt reduction has meant lower interest rates for college, car loans and home mortgages. With Government no longer draining resources out of the capital markets, private investment in equipment and software skyrocketed, and productivity gains kept fueling prosperity.
At the same time, we have invested in America's working families. We doubled student financial aid. In New York, for example, 45,000 more children enrolled in Head Start in 1999 than in 1993 and this year New York schools will receive an additional $100 million for renovations and repairs which, based on observations during my many visits, are very much needed.
Democrats and Republicans have worked together to set aside the Social Security and Medicare Trust Fund surpluses to extend their solvency. Together, we put more police on the streets, more teachers in classrooms and moved people from welfare to work.
And we have done all of this while holding Federal income taxes, as a percentage of income for the typical American family, to their lowest level in 35 years.
And something else happened. As the information age exploded, America flourished, making itself a leader in new technologies and increasing our productivity so that once again we became competitive in this new world. It turned out that these policies were not only prudent — but they opened the doors to the changes that prepared us and our children to be successes in the 21st Century. Twenty-two million new jobs were created — nearly 1 million in New York alone — unemployment dropped to 4 percent. And those jobs are pouring more than 900 billion dollars into our economy each year. That's how we have gone so quickly from deficit to surplus. But here's the catch: If we upset the careful balance of our economy, we can lose far more than the cost of the tax cut — a tax cut recession would cost us trillions more in lost income through lost jobs.
Mr. President, I share the concerns of many of my colleagues that President Bush's extremely large tax proposal will take us back back to the days of big deficits, high interest rates, shrinking investment, and a growing national debt.
I may be old-fashioned, but as the daughter of a small businessman who did not believe in living outside our means and who even paid cash for the house where we lived, I just don't believe we should spend what we don't yet have in the bank. President Bush's extremely large tax plan would spend trillions we don't have, and may never have.
If we reverse the engines of economic growth by adopting President Bush's tax proposal, I fear that we will reverse the progress we've made — by increasing interest rates now and by saddling our children with big debts in the future.
I know and respect that President Bush supports faith-based programs, but his tax plan should not be one of them. Going forward with a huge tax proposal now is like getting a letter from Ed McMahon and going out to buy a yacht. A surplus projection is not a promise. And if the past is any guide, it's not even a likely outcome.
That is not my view alone. It is the view of many experts who have testified before the Budget Committee, on which I serve. It is the view of colleagues like the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. Byrd and the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Nelson, both of whom voted for President Reagan's tax plans in the 1980's, only to regret those votes when those cuts plunged us deep into debt.
I encourage my colleagues to read the comments of both Mr. Byrd and Mr. Nelson in our Committee's proceedings, or speak with them personally about their historic and wise perspective.
The question before us is not whether or not we should enact tax cuts. I support tax cuts. The question is: how do we structure a responsible tax cut? A prudent tax cut that will allow us to pursue our important national values while keeping interest rates down and encouraging economic growth.
The path of fiscal discipline is marked by four signposts: It pays down the debt, it protects Social Security and Medicare, it invests wisely in children and families, and it reduces taxes in a prudent and sensible way.
I do not believe President Bush's tax plan meets those tests. It also fails the fairness test. President Bush says that, under his plan, the typical family of four will be able to keep $1,600 of their money. Citizens for Tax Justice found that when the Bush plan is fully in effect, 85 percent of families would receive a nominal tax cut of less than $1,600 or no tax cut at all.
Even if President Bush's proposal were fair to all Americans, it would not be prudent. During this time of surplus, it would leave nothing for the real reforms necessary to ensure that Social Security and Medicare are intact for future generations. The President's tax plan abandons the principle of putting first things first.
Just yesterday, some of America's wealthiest citizens came out against President Bush's estate tax repeal, saying that it was "bad for our democracy, our economy and our society." And I agree.
A tax cut that is fair to all Americans needs to be part of a framework that strengthens, not weakens, our economy. In my view, we can and should have a tax cut that cuts income tax rates, but we have to give relief to those paying the payroll tax on their income as well. And I believe there is a bipartisan consensus for smart, responsible and fair tax cuts.
It is smart to include a long-term care tax credit to provide relief for families caring for elderly and disabled family members. And the college opportunity tax deduction of $10,000 a year, championed by my distinguished colleague from New York, would enable families to pay for college, graduate study, or training courses. Tax cuts like these will bring tangible relief to New Yorkers and working families everywhere.
It's also both smart and responsible to invest in our people, especially in building the knowledge economy. And I know that the President has had first hand knowledge of that in his former position. We have to bring new technology to smaller communities across the country so they can take advantage of the well-educated workforce and higher education infrastructure that already exists in or near so many of these smaller communities.
And, we have an obligation to ensure fairness. We should not favor the richest Americans at the expense of the vast majority of Americans.
So how should we go forward? Will President Bush try to push through his one-sided and lop-sided proposals with the votes of his own party? If he does, I will respectfully have to dissent. Or will he sit down and negotiate to reduce its size and make it fairer to more Americans? If he does this then I hope I can support the outcome. Bipartisanship is a two-way street — it's not about Democrats supporting Republican proposals or even Republicans supporting Democratic proposals. It's about Republicans and Democrats working together to do what is right for the country. And the true test of leadership is not appealing to the people under the guise of bipartisanship, but actually hammering out a bipartisan compromise bill that merits the support of both sides of the aisle. That's the right way to pass a tax cut and protect our budget priorities.
And it is certainly what I hear when I meet with business leaders, workers and civic leaders in places like Rochester, and Rome, and Brooklyn and Watertown, just to name a few of the places I've been in the last week. They want a tax cut, but they also want to make sure we make the right choices for our budget.
History calls us to reject a spendthrift tax plan that would threaten our efforts to reform and modernize Medicare — including a long overdue prescription drug benefit that is voluntary, affordable and available to all beneficiaries.
I also fear a spendthrift tax plan would hurt our ability to invest in the military. As the gentleman from Connecticut, Mr. Lieberman, said this week, "the President's tax plan would consume more than 80 percent of the on-budget surplus, leaving nothing but fiscal leftovers for national security."
I don't think any of us want that.
For me, the details of the 2002 budget have to be negotiated. But the big choice is clear. We must pass a budget that keeps paying down the debt, provides sensible tax cuts and invests in priorities that matter to the people we represent. We must stay the course that has helped us build the longest economic expansion in our nation's history. And we must avoid a course that takes us back, throws caution to the wind and risks mortgaging our children's future.
I yield the floor. I suggest the absence of a quorum.

Mr. President, I rise to add my voice to those of my colleagues who are concerned about efforts to demolish this important worker health and safety standard.
I listened carefully to the remarks of my distinguished colleague from Missouri, and I understand there are many serious concerns being discussed about this regulation and its impact both on our workforce and our employers. But I ask that we remember where this started 10 years ago — in the previous Bush administration, under the leadership of Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole. We have held numerous hearings and studies to determine the impact of our 21st-century worksites on people's physical well-being.
OSHA is charged with the responsibility of setting standards for the workplace to help protect citizens from harm. In its 30 years of existence, OSHA has helped to save many lives and prevent countless injuries. Despite such a track record, we know that OSHA faces almost continual opposition from those who do not agree with its mission and who seek to undermine its work. This year, the opposition feels emboldened to strike at the heart of OSHA's latest efforts to protect American workers.
We are, of course, talking about the ergonomics standard, which is designed to help more than 600,000 workers who experience serious workplace injuries every year from repetitive motion and exertion. In enacting this standard, OSHA heard from thousands of witnesses and received the backing of the National Academy of Sciences and the Institute of Medicine.
The report to which my distinguished colleague from Missouri referred is this rather large report that was issued on January 18. I draw our attention to some of the conclusions and recommendations that were arrived at. Let me just quote from it:
The weight of the evidence justifies the identification of certain work-related risk factors for the occurrence of musculoskeletal disorders in the lower back and extremities. The panel concludes that there is a clear relationship--
I stress that--
Mr. President, destroying this standard would put many workers at risk, but today I want to focus on women workers in particular because, as my friend and colleague Senator Feinstein said, women account for 64 percent of repetitive motion injuries, even though we make up only 46 percent of the workforce.
Earlier today, I was joined by a number of women who have suffered from these disorders. One was Kathy Saumier, who was a worker at a plastics plant in Syracuse, NY. Kathy worked on a production line where she had to lift 40-pound boxes every 1 to 2 minutes while twisting and holding the boxes at an awkward angle in order to put the boxes on the conveyor belt.
With relatively small changes to the design of her work station, or with automated assistance in lifting the boxes, she and many of her coworkers could have been saved from such painful and time-consuming injuries.
Kathy joined me and my colleagues from Maryland and California, Senator Mikulski and Senator Boxer, at a news conference to highlight our concerns about these issues as they particularly affect women. Also speaking was Dianne Moriarity, who, for 18 years, worked as a school secretary in New York. Because of her years of work in a badly designed work station, both of her wrists and hands are damaged. She showed me the picture of her work station. The computer was bolted in a certain way so it could not be moved. The space for the chair was such that it could not be angled, and there was no place for her to be able to move comfortably to fulfill her obligations at that worksite. She is in virtually constant discomfort and needs regular therapy.
We also heard from Jennifer Hunter from Virginia, who worked for 20 years in a chicken processing plant. She was required, as the chickens went down the line, to make 1,400 cuts each hour. She spoke specifically about what it took to prepare the filet of chicken breast, which so many of us enjoy and eat at home or order in a restaurant, and how difficult it was at the speed of that line to be able to get those cuts in, and how her wrists had to be constantly moving.
She, too, has suffered serious health effects from that kind of repetitive motion. As she told us today, we really need this standard so that workers are protected.
Heidi Eberhardt of Massachusetts worked at an Internet publishing company, writing, editing, and researching. She is only 32 years old. This was her dream job. She was able to put her college education to work. But because of the repetitive motion that was required over long hours sitting at her computer, she finds it impossible to perform some of the daily functions we all take for granted. She can't turn on a faucet; she can't squeeze a toothpaste tube; she can't twist an ice cube tray or even open mail without severe limitations and pain. As Heidi said, this is not just about the people who are already injured; this is about hundreds of thousands of workers who will become injured if there is no ergonomic standard for the workplace.
One of the reasons women are adversely affected by this workplace hazard is because women hold more than 80 percent of the jobs that involve repetitive motion injuries, jobs such as hotel cleaning, data entry, secretarial positions, sewing.
Those who are here today working to save this worker safety standard understand that our opponents believe it will impose a costly burden on business. But as our distinguished colleague, Senator Feinstein from California, pointed out, those businesses that have already implemented standards have found they save money. They save money by keeping their workers on the job, in good health, and more productive.
Certainly in New York we have found that businesses which have implemented the standards have reaped rewards: businesses such as garment manufacturers, Sequins International in Queens, or Xerox in Rochester, a company that has had ergonomic standards in place since 1988. We have found that these standards and the businesses that implement them are taking not only better care of their workers but better care of their bottom line.
In addition to our concerns about the substance of the standard, we are also deeply concerned about the manner in which the opponents seek to destroy this important worker safety provision. Everyone is willing to work together to change or improve the standard. If there are legitimate concerns that have been raised, there are certainly ways we can go about working to ameliorate those concerns.
As my colleague, the senior Senator from Massachusetts, put it so well, this is an effort that is truly a legislative atom bomb. The Congressional Review Act has never been used before. It does more than rescind the worker safety standard. It does ensure that the Labor Department can never again put forth an ergonomic standard. It is, in effect, a gag rule on worker safety. By dropping this Congressional Review Act atom bomb, opponents will completely eliminate 10 years of bipartisan effort in two administrations, many hours of public review and witness testimony, and extensive research in less than 10 hours of debate — 10 years versus 10 hours.
I can appreciate the desire by some to make changes to the standard. But I hope we can talk about ways that such changes would be considered, give the public a chance to be heard, and any changes would be based not upon anecdote, not upon story after story but on science and on the legitimate concerns of both workers and businesses.
We should simply not bow to pressure groups and wipe this worker safety standard off the face of our regulatory planet. We are here today to send a clear message that this is not the way to go about creating a safe workplace or working with businesses to make it safer for them to employ people across the vast sectors of the economy that use repetitive motion. We particularly are concerned about the impact this will have on women in the workplace.
We are also concerned this could mark the beginning of an erosion of protection for workers in America; if you will, a legislative repetitive motion that will undo safeguards that save lives.
In the 20th century, we made great advances in protecting workers. Often those advances came because of a tragedy, a terrible fire, a mine collapse, a factory assembly line run amok, when all of a sudden it became clear that we were putting people's lives and well-being at risk. This is a silent epidemic. There will not be a big newspaper headline about a crash of ergonomics. We will see just the slow but steady erosion of people's health and their productivity and their capacity to get up and go to work and to go home and do what they need to do for themselves and their families.
This is an issue that goes to the heart of the new economy. How do we provide for 21st century workers the protections we did finally work out after lots of effort? We should not go back. We should not turn our backs on America's working families. We should, instead, defeat this effort to kill this vitally important standard and then utilize the procedures available to us to go ahead and consider whatever the concerns on the other side might be.
I ask our distinguished opponents to think hard about using this legislative atom bomb and, instead, consider how we can, through existing procedures, petition the administration to stay the regulation while further work is done. We can also petition the agency to modify or repeal the standards, and we can have OSHA initiate rulemaking procedures to modify the rule in accordance with the Administrative Procedures Act. If the real point here is to protect small business and protect workers, there are ways of going about that which are already provided for. It is hard to understand why we would need to blow away 10 years of work, the findings of nonpartisan, objective scientists, and the stories that flood many of our offices from workers who are endangered, in order to deal with what could be legitimate questions.
I certainly hope we are able to disapprove this resolution so we can, together, work on behalf of the American worker.

I thank the Chair.
(The remarks of Mrs. Clinton pertaining to the introduction of S. 476 are located in today's Record under "Statements on Introduced Bills and Joint Resolutions.")

Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.

Madam President, I will speak to one of the pending amendments. I rise today to offer my support for a pending amendment offered by Senator Conrad, the Social Security and Medicare Off-Budget Lockbox Act of 2001.
This legislation would protect Social Security and Medicare trust funds from being raided to pay for tax cuts or programs and would ensure our continuing commitment of the surpluses to debt reduction. I am pleased that similar legislation has had broad, bipartisan support in both the Senate and the House over the past years, as I believe it is the responsible step that we should take to ensure these vital benefits remain available, with the paying down of the debt, with assuring that we have affordable tax cuts, and with the investments that we need to make to ensure our country is stronger in the future.
Now, I know that the chairman of the Budget Committee, for whom I have the greatest respect, suggests this amendment is more of a scare tactic than a real effort to protect Medicare and Social Security. But I have to respectfully disagree. This amendment is nearly identical to the amendment for which 60 Senators, including 16 of our colleagues on the other side of the aisle, voted in favor of last year as an amendment to the Labor/HHS appropriations bill, but it was unfortunately dropped in conference. It is important to raise it again now because, much to my disappointment, President Bush's budget blueprint does appear to raid the Social Security and Medicare trust funds to pay for his tax cut proposal.
Over the past several weeks, members of the administration have come before the Budget Committee, on which I serve, and argued that President Bush's blueprint protects the Social Security and Medicare trust funds. But you can look at the numbers and see that is not the case. A table in the blueprint entitled "The President's 10-year Plan," for example, refers to a contingency reserve of over $840 billion, of which over $500 billion of that comes from the Medicare trust fund.
Since other parts of the administration's budget seriously underfund many important priorities, such as a prescription drug benefit for our seniors on Medicare, national defense, investments in our schools and our children, our teachers, and other significant areas for which there is broad bipartisan support, it also proposes hundreds of billions of dollars in unspecified cuts across programs. And there isn't any mystery. There can't be any mystery that if you combine a very large tax cut with underfunding important programs and leaving out many others, then there will not be the money in this reserve, and it is money taken out of the Medicare trust fund that will be available to cover the priorities that we would determine are in our national interest.
During the time of projected surpluses, I have to ask, is this really the choice that we want to be making? Madam President, I know most New Yorkers would agree that it would be both unfair and wrong to shortchange either our seniors or our children when it comes to prescription drug benefits, or investments in smaller class sizes, school construction, and other important programs that will improve the quality of education.
The real choice we face should be between a very large tax cut from which millions of working Americans would receive little to no tax relief and the three priorities which I think we can agree on in this body — a priority for affordable tax cuts, a priority to continue to pay down the debt, and a priority of the kind of investment that we need to make.
For example, I believe we should invest in a real prescription drug benefit. The President's immediate helping hand proposal denies eligibility for prescription drugs to nearly 25 million Medicare beneficiaries, most of whom today lack affordable, dependable prescription drug coverage.
Republican and Democratic Governors have also raised concerns with this proposal, noting that it fails to meet the immediate prescription drug needs of their elderly and disabled residents.
The challenge should be not deciding to shortchange our seniors on prescription drugs in order to give a very large tax cut to people at the upper end of the income scale, but it should be between how do we keep all of our priorities in order and how do we provide prudent tax relief, continue to pay down the debt, and invest in what will make us a healthier, better-educated, stronger Nation.
I believe Senator Conrad's amendment to lock away the Social Security and Medicare trust funds sets the right balance. It clearly takes off budget what should be off budget. It should not be used for a contingency, for tax cuts, or for spending; it should be used for what it was intended to be used for: to meet the Social Security and Medicare needs of our seniors.
I ask that I be added as a cosponsor, and I urge my colleagues, as they did once before on an appropriations measure, to ensure the solvency of the important programs, such as Medicare, and to ensure the provision of a prescription drug benefit to our seniors on Medicare, and to deal with the other important priorities that we face.
Madam President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.

Mr. President, I join in support of this amendment because we know, from a lot of the work that has been done over the last several years, many students are being deliberately solicited, even targeted, for credit cards before they are financially independent, responsible, or knowledgeable about what it is they are signing up for. Story after story has demonstrated clearly that this particular amendment by my good friend, the Senator from Connecticut, targets a real problem.
I think all of us are committed to ensuring that people who are irresponsible with their financial affairs are held accountable. But I think we should look at our young people in a different category. It used to be no one could be held financially responsible when they were under 21. Then the age was dropped for many purposes to 18. But despite how quickly it seems our children grow up these days, there are many young people in college or out working who are not yet 21 who do not really have the experience to deal with the solicitations that come flooding through the mail and over the telephone that we know are targeting them with these credit card applications.
This morning, I was talking with another colleague of ours who told me he was babysitting for his very young grandchildren. He put them to bed, the phone rang, and the person on the other end asked for one of his granddaughters. Our colleague said: What is this about? He was told, much to his amazement, that his 5\1/2\-year-old granddaughter had been approved for a new credit card. He said he was shocked this kind of activity was going on and did not really believe it until it happened in his own family.
I urge our colleagues, regardless of the position we take on the underlying legislation, we should stand behind the basic principle that our young people should not be solicited, they should be given some better credit training as this amendment proposes, and there should be some sense of responsibility on the part of creditors before they reach out to entice our young people into these credit cards before they even know what it is they are signing up for. It looks all so easy, and they end up in trouble, with debts they cannot pay.
Let's try to avoid that. That does not mean they cannot ever become customers, but let's make it a little more reasonable in the steps that have to be taken in order for them to qualify.
I certainly urge passage of this amendment. I thank my good friend, the Senator from Utah, for yielding time.
I yield the floor.

Mr. President, I thank my good friend from Connecticut. I also thank Senators Torricelli and Corzine for bringing this important issue to the forefront of this debate because clearly we are not going to be able to have the kind of campaign finance reform that many of us are hoping will come out of this process if we do not address the most expensive aspect of modern-day campaigns.
As we all know, that is the advertising that we have to do in order to communicate with voters about where we stand on issues. It is a particular challenge in large States. But it is a national one that all of my colleagues face.
The Torricelli amendment, which would amend the Communications Act of 1934, would require that the lowest unit rate be provided to committees of political parties or candidates purchasing time. I think that is in the best interest of our democracy. I certainly believe it is the kind of reform that goes to the real heart of what the money chase is all about.
I think a lot of us would like to be able to turn the clock back to the days that some of our colleagues can remember, but for most of us, we just read about it, where you could literally go out into a town square or out in the countryside, set up a little platform, visit with constituents, make a speech, keep on going, and reach most of the people who were going to vote for you or make a decision on an important issue. Those days are long gone. The television broadcast networks know they are the means by which we must communicate.
I think this amendment is not only fair but long overdue. I commend the Senator from New Jersey for bringing it to the floor. I hope the television industry recognizes that there is an effort to not just have a level playing field but fulfill what many of us thought was the bargain; that when we use the public airwaves for communications — and those communications are basically controlled by the companies that have been given, in my opinion, the privilege of having those airwaves — that there has to be some way they give back to keep the first amendment alive, to keep democracy going. I am just so pleased that we are going to have a chance to vote on it.
I thank my good friend from Connecticut for yielding some time so that I could weigh in on the importance of this issue.

Thank you very much.
Mr. President, I didn't realize it until after I spoke, but my good friend, Senator Torricelli from New Jersey, gave me one of the articles he read into the Record that I have yet a new title; that is, "Modern Day Santa Claus."
I was given an article that was written by Paul Taylor about broadcasters and their desire to have political advertising.
I was delighted to learn that I am a beautiful thing like Santa Claus because the campaign I ran brought, I guess, great beauty and good cheer to the broadcasters of my State.
I would like to add to my previous comments in support of this amendment that I think this is a good start to ensure that the spirit of the current law is enacted and implemented. But I think we should go further. And later in the debate I hope we will have a chance to talk about even going further, to perhaps legislate the 5 minutes that has been suggested by a number of people as being free air time, and even to have a debate on an issue I support, which is free broadcast time across the board and some way to fulfill the political obligations of communications that I think our society so desperately needs without having the charges attached to it that we currently are experiencing.
I know in 1997 when the FCC doubled the amount of the spectrum it licensed to television broadcasters, I joined with many others in recommending that 5-minute, voluntary, candidate-centered discourse during the 30 days leading up to the campaign. We know that is not happening.
I think we need to do more to provide free air time for political candidates. I hope we will not only pass this amendment but go on to consider other ways we can make air time more readily available. If it were in my power, as Santa Claus, to give that gift to the American people, I would certainly do it. But I am going to try to make that case in addition to supporting this very worthy amendment.
I thank the Senator from Kentucky for yielding me time.

I thank the Chair.
(The remarks of Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Dodd, and Mr. Wellstone pertaining to the introduction of S. 584 are located in today's Record under "Statements on Introduced Bills and Joint Resolutions.")

My good friend from Connecticut raised an issue that troubles me about this proposed amendment that the distinguished Senator from Utah has put forth.
In addition to the issues that Senator Kennedy and Senator Dodd have raised about the vagueness and definitional concerns raised in the amendment, this particular issue is the real heart of the parity problem that many of us have with this amendment.
It reminds me of the old Anatole France saying: The law is fair; neither the rich nor the poor can sleep under the bridge. What we have is an amendment that in its practice not only would fall disproportionately on unions as compared to corporations but which, under the rationale put forward by it, completely leaves out other membership groups, as the Senator from Connecticut so rightly points out.
The burdensome reporting requirements that are imposed under this amendment on unions in particular are really much more difficult to comply with than if they would be in a corporation. As I understand the amendment, corporations would be required to report only on expenditures from their own general treasuries and from the general treasuries of their subsidiaries. However, unions would be required to report on the expenditures from all of their affiliates, which would mean that a local union would be required to report on expenditures by a national union, and vice versa, even though neither of them had either access or control to the financial records of the other.
This point we heard about from Senator Dodd is particularly important. If the point we are trying to get at with this amendment is to understand who is doing what with what funds to engage in political activity during election cycles, then clearly a lot of the other membership groups that raise and spend tremendous amounts of money — two were mentioned, the NRA, the Sierra Club, you can add the Chambers of Commerce, National Right to Work Foundation, other groups across the political spectrum----

My question would be: In response to the discussion between the Senators on this issue, how can we impose undue burdens on only unions as compared to corporations and completely leave out of the Senator's concerns all of these membership groups that raise tremendous amounts of money, are on the front lines of our political campaigns, have a direct influence on how voters vote, and yet are in no way covered by the Senator's amendment?

Madam President, I come to the floor today to speak out and join the distinguished Senator from West Virginia and the distinguished Senator from Florida to express our concerns about the upcoming budget debate.
First, I thank Senator Byrd for his extraordinary commitment to this institution, which is really unprecedented in history and is such a blessing for not only the institution and those who have been privileged to serve with him but for our country. And I heed his words seriously because he has taken the long view about what is in the best interests of a deliberative body, of this Senate, of a nation, that should rely upon the careful, thoughtful analysis of the issues that come before us and the people we represent.
I am personally grateful to him for the time he has taken as my good friend, the distinguished Senator from Florida, referred to, to help mentor us freshmen Senators, to give us the guidance we need to be able to do the best possible job for the people who sent us here. And it is such an honor to stand on the floor of this Senate, a place I have long revered, on behalf of New Yorkers.
But I come today with somewhat of a heavy heart because I believe in the principles and values this Senate represents. I want to see them fulfilled. I want to be a part of perpetuating them into our future.
I find myself, as a new Member, struck by how difficult it will be to discharge my responsibilities in the upcoming week without having seen the budget, without having the opportunity to debate its priorities, and even more than its priorities, the values which it seeks to implement. I do not know that the people I represent, or the people any of us represent, will get the benefit of our best judgment, that the decisions we make will be grounded in our careful, thoughtful analysis.
There will certainly be differences among us. That is what makes this a great deliberative body and makes our country so great. We come with different experiences. We come with different viewpoints. I come as the daughter of a small businessman who did not believe in mortgages, did not have a house until he could pay for it with cash, did not believe in credit, and who believed it was his responsibility to always make sure our family's books were balanced.
I come with the belief that we had to go to extraordinary efforts to make sure our economy enjoyed these last 8 years of prosperity and progress and that we could not have done so had we not reversed the decade of deficits and debt that really did undermine America's capacity at home and abroad.
So when we talk about the important debate in which we will engage next week, I think it is the most important debate in which I may engage in my entire term as Senator. It is certainly one of the most important debates for our country, and everyone who is following it, to understand what is at stake.
This debate will set our priorities as a nation for the foreseeable future and could determine whether or not we have surpluses, whether or not we will be prepared for the impending retirement of the baby boomers that starts in just 11 years. It is a debate that will certainly be about numbers, deficit projections, surplus projections, and spending.
But I think underlying it is a debate about who we are as a people. It is not only about our prosperity, not only about our Federal budget — it is certainly about that — it is about who we are as Americans.
I come to this body determined to represent the people of my State and our country, as all of us do. But will we be able to do that? We are going to be deciding, in the votes we cast — starting with procedural votes — whether or not our seniors will have prescription drug benefits. We are going to be deciding whether or not our children will have the teachers they need and the schools they deserve to have. We are going to be deciding whether we have the sewer systems and the clean drinking water that every American deserves and should be able to count on. We are going to be deciding whether or not we do have the resources to maintain America's strength around the world, whether we will combat terrorism, whether we will stand firm with our allies. We are going to be determining whether we make the investments in research and development that will make us a stronger, richer, smarter nation in the decades ahead.
I am deeply concerned that we enter this debate without the benefit of the administration's budget.
I am privileged to serve on the Budget Committee under the extraordinary leadership of the Senator from North Dakota and my colleagues, the Senators from West Virginia and Florida. We sat through fascinating hearings. We listened as our defense priorities were discussed, as our education priorities were discussed, as our health care priorities were discussed. We listened to experts from all across the spectrum of economic opinion and analysis. I found it an extraordinarily enlightening experience. But we are not going to get a chance to debate with our colleagues what it is we as a committee should be deciding to recommend to this body with respect to the budget we will be debating. So we are flying blind. We are looking through a glass darkly. We are in the dark.
Will this budget have the investments we need to protect child care and child abuse programs? The early information is it will not; that we will be turning our backs on working parents, cutting tens of millions of dollars from child care. Will we protect our most vulnerable children, those who are abused? The information we have, without a budget but kind of leaking out of the administration, suggests that we are going to be asked to cut child abuse prevention programs.
We also are being told that we are going to be asked in this budget to cut training programs for the pediatricians who take care of the sickest of our children in our children's hospitals. These are very difficult issues in any circumstance, but not to have the chance to be able to analyze what is being proposed is troubling to me. Will this budget ensure our children will grow up in a safe environment with clean water and clean air, with access to quality, affordable health care? Will it adequately protect our food supply? Every day we see a new article in the paper about what is happening with our food supply in Europe, in the United States, around the world. Will we be able to protect ourselves so we have the kind of reliable food supply that Americans deserve?
What are we doing in this time of surplus to ensure a safety net for all Americans, young and old? The prescription drug benefit that we hear about from the administration would leave over 25 million of our seniors without prescription drugs. I don't want to choose between some of our seniors and others in New York, those who may be just a penny over the limit that they, therefore, won't get the prescription drugs they need. I want to make sure that everyone on Medicare — and that is what most Americans want — has access to those prescription drugs.
To pay for the tax cut, the administration includes the Medicare surpluses. Those are resources that should be ensuring the solvency of Medicare for all Americans, totally in a reserve that is set off, never to be used for any other obligations. I believe other obligations that we have should be paid for in the context of a balanced budget and not put Medicare at risk.
The administration has correctly committed to doubling the number of people served through community health centers. I support that. It is a worthy goal. But then on the other hand, I understand they are doing it by completely eliminating the community access program that ensures that community health providers work together to create an infrastructure for care so no patient falls through the cracks. New York is filled with wonderful religiously based hospitals, privately based hospitals that are part of this infrastructure of care that would be left out completely. We also have the finest teaching hospitals in the world. There are no resources that will continue to make sure that they are the finest in the world. New York trains 50 percent of all the doctors in America. What are the plans for making sure that continues and that our teaching hospitals are given the resources they need?
We are also hearing that the administration's budget will provide more security guards for our Nation's schools. That, too, is a worthy goal. In fact, I was heart broken to hear today of yet another school shooting in another school in another part of our country. That is an issue we must address. If security guards would help, I will support that. But I am troubled and my heart goes out to the families who are suffering these terrible tragedies in school shootings.
I will do whatever I can on all fronts to try to deal with that problem. But I understand from the President's budget that they are shifting funds from the very successful COPS Program that has really helped us drive down the crime rate in order to pay for the security guards at the schools. We are robbing Peter to pay Paul. Why would we take resources away from the COPS Program, where so many brave men and women put on the uniform and walk those streets, that has become so effective in driving crime out of neighborhoods? Why would we take money away from our police officers and put it in our security guards at schools, if we need to do both? I argue strenuously we do.
Are we being confronted with such a Hobson's choice because of a genuine shortage of resources or are we making these choices and cutting needed investments simply to allow for an enormously expensive tax cut that leaves millions of Americans out, leaves millions of America's working families again behind where they need to be in order to make the decisions that are best for their families because we are favoring others?
The kinds of priorities I speak of today, for which I have fought for so many years, going back to the days when we tried to bring fiscal responsibility to our budget, when we tried to lower the crime rate, when we tried to improve health care and education and protect the environment, are bipartisan priorities. These are genuinely American priorities. Child care, child abuse prevention, police on our streets, we don't stop and ask: Are you for it or against that based on party? We say: Isn't this something we should do together in America?
Madam President, I hope we will come together once again, Republicans and Democrats, Americans, to fashion a budget that pays down the debt, which is still the best tax cut we can give the vast majority of Americans. That is what puts money in your pocket when you have to have a mortgage, when you do have a credit card, when you do have a car payment. Let's keep those interest rates down.
We have learned from the last 8 years that the best way to do that is to be fiscally responsible and pay down our debt.
We need to provide sensible tax relief. Everybody in this Chamber is for that — sensible, affordable, fiscally responsible tax relief that says to every American, we are going to make it possible for everybody to share in these surpluses. We are not going to favor one group over another. That is the kind of tax relief I would be proud to be part of and for which I will speak out.
Finally, we need a budget that invests in our Nation's most pressing needs, not just what we see right before us. The fact that we should continue to lower class size in the early grades, that we should continue to modernize our schools, those are needs I see every day. I go in and out of schools. I talk with teachers and parents and students. I know how much better our education system can be if we have both increased accountability and increased investments. I know we have needs that are staring us right in the face that we may be turning our back on if we are not careful.
I also want to be looking to the horizon, looking around the corner. It is not just enough to take care of today. We have to be thinking about next year and the next 10 years and the next 25 and 50 years, if we are to fulfill our obligations as stewards for our people. That means we cannot turn our backs on the demands of Social Security and Medicare.
As a member of the so-called baby boomer generation, I do not want to be part of a generation that is not responsible. The World War II generation is often rightly called the greatest generation. I am proud of the service of my father. I am proud of the service of all who came before. But they also understood the investment that needed to be made. It was in those years after that war when we started investing in our Nation's schools, started building the Interstate Highway System, started making the investment that we, frankly, have been living on for the last 50 years in this country. How on Earth can we keep faith with those who came before us, let alone our children and grandchildren and great grandchildren, if we don't have the same level of responsibility?
I think we have a rendezvous with responsibility, and it is now. If we turn our backs on that responsibility, we are going to have a great price to pay. Maybe the bill won't become due until 5 years, 10 years, maybe 15 or 25 years. But like my colleagues who have spoken, I want to be able to say to the young children I meet that we tried to be responsible, we tried to do the right thing that will make us a stronger, richer, smarter nation.
The American people — and I certainly know that people in New York who sent me — send us here to Washington to work together across party lines, to make the tough choices necessary to move our country forward. That is exactly what I want to do. It is not necessarily going to mean that Democrats will support all Republican proposals, or vice versa. But what it does mean is that we will reason together and work together to do what is right for our Nation. I hope when that process begins next week we will have a chance to really sit down and look at the President's budget, have a good, honest, open debate, as we just had these last few weeks about another very important matter before this body, and that we will honestly say what the priorities are we are setting, the values we stand for, the vision we have for America.
I believe there won't be a more important issue that I will face. I want to make my decisions in a deliberative, thoughtful manner. I want to look for ways I can work with my friends across the aisle, as well as my colleagues on this side, because I want to be sure that at the end of the day we have done the right thing for the children of America. If we are not going to leave any child behind, then let's make sure we know what we are voting on that will affect every child.
If we can make that determination to work together, I am confident we can come up with a bipartisan, sensible policy that leads to a budget we can support. In the absence of that, it will be very difficult to do so, and I hope that certainly the people of New York and America understand we are trying to stand firmly in favor of a process that may sound arcane and difficult from time to time to understand but which goes back, as Senator Byrd so rightly points out, to people who were very thoughtful about how to design a process that protected the rights of everybody. It is not just about that, as important as that is; it is fundamentally about the choices we will make for the children and families of America.
I know that people of good faith will find a way to come to a resolution about how we proceed next week. I am looking forward to that. But I do have to say that, in the absence of such an agreement, I for one will have to be asking the hard questions the people of New York sent me here to ask about what specifically will be done to affect the hopes and aspirations and needs and interests of the people I represent.
So I will be guided by three principles:
Will this budget pay down the debt to continue us on a path of fiscal responsibility that protects Social Security and Medicare?
Will we be in a position to recognize that the investments we need to make are important investments that are not going to disappear overnight?
And, at the end of the day, will we have made decisions that will protect America's long-term interests at home and abroad?
Madam President, I hope I will be able to answer affirmatively every one of those questions.
I yield back the remainder of my time.

Mr. President, I rise in support of Senator Thomas' resolution, which calls for the immediate release of the crew members of the EP-3E that was forced to make an emergency landing at the Lingshui, Hainan airbase on April 1st. Securing the safe return of the crew and their aircraft is a top priority for our country and this resolution makes that clear.
And I know that I speak for my constituents when I say that I am deeply concerned about the safety of the twenty-four U.S. crew members who are being held in China. My thoughts and prayers are with all of them and their family members, including the family of Kenneth Richter, a Navy cryptographer and native of Staten Island, New York.
We are fortunate to have brave men and women like Kenneth Richter serve our country. It is a reminder of how the courage and hard work of those in our armed forces help to keep America free and secure.
All Americans stand as one behind the President as our nation presses for the immediate release of our people and our aircraft. There is absolutely no justification for their detention for one minute, let alone so many days.

Mr. President, I thank my distinguished colleague from Minnesota. I associate myself with the remarks of the education Senator from Massachusetts who so eloquently laid out our dilemma, the dilemma that will be occupying the Senate as we move forward on this very important debate.
People always talk about important debates, but it is fair to say as we debate, we will set educational policy for our Nation for the next 7 years. There is hardly a subject we can think of that will have more direct impact on our families, on our communities, on our economy, and especially on our children. We are setting the stage for determining how much we as a nation will do to make good on the promise of a quality education for all children, and particularly for our country's neediest children.
I first became involved in education reform back in 1983 with the issuance of the report called "A Nation at Risk," which was issued under President Reagan's watch. Many took that call to action very much to heart that we were a nation at risk. We began looking for ways to improve education, to provide more resources to provide more accountability measures. We have made progress over those last years.
When the Elementary and Secondary Education Act was last reauthorized in 1994, we sent a strong signal that although education was absolutely a matter of local concern, it had to be a national priority; that we all had to recognize we were failing our children by not providing adequate educational resources and by not expecting them to do the very best they could do. We put a high priority on academic standards, and we worked to help teachers and administrators, parents, and communities improve education.
The results of this strong Federal response to local and State educational demands has been heartening. Mr. President, 49 States plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico have developed State standards and are working to implement them. These reforms are producing results.
We often only focus on the negative side of the ledger about how much we still have to do. I give some credit to the children and the young people, our students, and their parents, and especially their teachers, because we have seen progress. Reading and math scores for fourth graders in our highest poverty school districts have improved by nearly a grade level from 1994 to today. SAT scores are on the rise. More students than ever are attending college.
We cannot rest there. We know there is still far more to be done. We have too many children, particularly in our underserved urban and rural districts, who are not reading at grade level. We have too many children being taught by uncertified teachers, in overcrowded classrooms, in crumbling school buildings. We cannot stand by idly while these conditions persist. The issue is, what is the best way to address them? How better can we equip parents, teachers, communities, and our students to meet the tests of the 21st century?
I applaud President Bush for calling for greater accountability. I agree with him on the importance of that. I was among the very first in our Nation, in Arkansas in the early 1980s, to call for the testing of students and the testing of teachers because I believed then we had to know what we didn't know in order to make progress. We couldn't just pretend that everything was fine and engage in social promotion and not face up to the fact that we had children graduating from high school who couldn't read a job application. We had teachers who had been themselves passed through the education system who were unprepared to teach the substance of what it was they were assigned to teach.
Accountability is key, to me. I have been a strong supporter of that. In fact, I welcome the Republicans and I welcome the Bush administration which has gone forward with accountability measures that are like the measures Democrats have proposed for several years. Many on the other side of the aisle resisted such approaches for many years. In fact, they wanted to abolish the Department of Education. So I applaud my colleagues on the Republican side for the progress they have made in moving toward a common recognition that this is a national priority that must be beyond politics and partisanship.
The accountability that is in the bill that is proposed would ask that we test our children every year from third to eighth grade. That is designed to ensure that they are meeting high standards. But here is where the rubber really hits the road. If all we do is order more tests, if we do not combine those tests with the resources that are needed to help the children who have been left behind, then we will have, at best, a hollow victory and I believe, worse than that, we will have committed educational fraud on our children, our teachers, and our country.
The Bush plan orders more testing while providing only half the funds needed to design and implement these tests. What would this mean to the State of New York, for example? It would mean that of the $16 million that is estimated to have to be spent to comply with these new Federal requirements, our State would only get $8 million. So we would have to find 8 million more dollars, take it out of something else — from hard-pressed school districts, from teacher pay, from whatever other important objective we are already trying to meet. We should not be passing on an unfunded mandate to our States.
If it is a national priority, if it is a priority for this administration to order these tests, then the Federal Government ought to pay for these tests and make sure that, as the Senator from Massachusetts pointed out, they are good tests; they are quality tests; they are not just make-work kinds of tests.
Passing tough new accountability standards without the resources to help our schools and students is similar to handing out thermometers in the midst of an epidemic. The thermometers certainly can tell us that there are a lot of sick people, but they do absolutely nothing to help people get better. Unfortunately, the administration's proposal has plenty of thermometers but precious little medicine to help our schools improve. The administration has not even yet committed to providing the Federal funds necessary to marry accountability with student achievement.
We already know that despite the rhetoric, this is not an increase of more than 11 percent; it is only 5.9 percent because the administration tried to count money that had been appropriated last year. We are glad to have that money, but let's have honest accounting about how much more money is going in. A 5.9-percent increase barely keeps up with inflation and population increases.
What also does it mean on the school level? Let's focus and ask ourselves: If we pass this accountability measure, and everybody goes home, pats themselves on the back, there is a big press conference, and a big signing ceremony, what have we really done to help the districts such as the ones I worry about in the State of New York?
In New York City, for example, we are facing a severe teacher shortage. The city will need to hire approximately 40,000 — that is right, 40,000 — teachers over the next 4 years. In addition, the district is under a court order to place those certified teachers it hires in the lowest performing schools. That makes sense because right now we have uncertified teachers, ill equipped to teach, teaching the children who need the best teachers. So the idea, which is a good idea, is let's put the certified teachers in the schools where the children need them the most.
But what has happened? Last week we learned from the chancellor of the New York City schools that the certified teachers turned down the jobs in the hard-to-teach schools. Why? Because those are the schools that are already overcrowded; those are the schools that are crumbling; those are the schools that hardly have a book in the library; those are the schools without the computers connected by the cables they need to be able to be functional, let alone to be accessible to the Internet.
We cannot in good conscience demand that school districts hire certified teachers without providing the resources to help these hard-pressed districts recruit and retain these teachers. And we have to do more to make these schools attractive to certified teachers.
Answer me, why you would go into a very difficult school to teach children who are under lots of stress at home and in their neighborhoods if the school is not well equipped to give you the resources you need to try to do a good job with those children?
I will be working with colleagues on both sides of the aisle to introduce a bipartisan teacher recruitment amendment. We all know if we do not place the recruitment of our teachers at the top of our national agenda we will have school districts that are barely able to open their doors in the next couple of years. We will be asking people literally to come off the streets and start teaching because we will not have the teachers we need. I meet people all the time who want to be teachers, but they will not, they cannot, and they should not work under the conditions under which many of our teachers are asked to function.
I am also concerned about the proposal the President includes called Straight A's. This is a demonstration project that would give 7 States and 25 school districts the chance to block grant Federal dollars. People are often talking about how important it is to give authority back to the States, and I agree with that in most instances. But we know from years of education research that block granting funds — which means taking the Federal dollars and sending them to the State capitol — means that those dollars do not get to the students and the schools that need them the most in the amount that they should. They get siphoned off in the bureaucracy of the State capitol. They get sent to other places that do not need them but, for political purposes, have the influence to get them. We should be targeting those hard-earned Federal dollars to those school districts and those students who are so far behind.
Right now in New York we know, because of a court decision, that the children in New York City do not get their fair share of education funding. So we should do everything possible to get the dollars to the students who need them the most in the schools where the teachers have a chance to try to help them.
We also know from research that smaller class sizes make a huge difference, and the Class Size Reduction Initiative has worked wonders. We now have teachers in New York who are federally funded who are helping to lower class size. We have already seen positive results from the school achievement scores.
We also know that construction funding to help schools repair their buildings and modernize them and even construct the buildings they need is very necessary. These two important programs, class size reduction and school construction, are eliminated for all purposes in the Bush administration proposal. I say this is a mistake, and I ask the administration, with all respect, to please reconsider this decision.
The administration says that reducing class size with Federal dollars and helping to construct and repair schools are not Federal responsibilities. I know they are not totally Federal responsibilities, but I do not think in today's world they are also solely local responsibilities. The districts that need the help the most are not the districts like the one I live in where, with very high property taxes from affluent people, the children have everything they could possibly dream of. But in so many districts, suburban taxpayers cannot pay another penny to fix their schools and do what is necessary to have up-to-date labs. In many rural districts they do not have the tax base to do that, and in many urban districts they don't have the dollars because they don't get their fair allocation from the State, and they cannot tax themselves to be able to meet the needs of children for whom English is not their first language, who come to school with undiagnosed mental illnesses, who live in a system of deprivation and violence and who cannot perform at the same level as the children in my district.
Let's have a shared responsibility. That was the whole idea behind the Class Size Reduction Initiative and School Construction Initiative. If education is to be a national priority, let's invest in what we know works — and we know reducing class size and providing good facilities actually works — to make for better education.
I hope we will continue in the spirit that we began in the education committee as we marked up this bill, in the negotiations that are currently ongoing with the administration. But I am very concerned that this particular proposal falls way short of what we need to be doing. It falls short for a very simple reason. The administration would rather invest in a large, fiscally irresponsible tax cut than in the education of our children and particularly those who are most needy in rural and urban districts.
I hope this will be reconsidered because this failure to properly fund education, to me, is disappointing at a time when we have surpluses, when we do not have to squander these surpluses on large tax cuts that will go disproportionately to the already wealthy whose children already attend schools that have all the computers, all the bells and whistles, all the extra help they could possibly have.
Let's, instead, take a moment and step back. I hear a lot about the greatest generation. My parents were part of the greatest generation, the World War II generation. I think they probably have to take a second seat to the greatest generation being the Founders of our Country. But there is no argument that those who survived the Depression, won World War II, and set the stage for winning the cold war, were among the greatest if they were not the greatest generation our country has ever seen.
We have been living off the investments and sacrifices of our parents and our grandparents for more than 50 years. My father, who is a rock-ribbed Republican, voted for higher school taxes because he knew the education of his children depended upon good schools. We invested in the Interstate Highway System. We set a goal to send a man to the Moon. We had big dreams, and we worked to fulfill those dreams.
Today, at the beginning of this new century, it is up to us to make the decisions, the hard decisions to invest in our children's education. And shame on us if we do not make the right decisions. We can pass a bill that is filled with testing and sounds good but 10 years from now we will still have children in overcrowded classrooms and crumbling buildings who are being deprived of certified, qualified teachers, and we will wonder what went wrong.
Let's instead be sensible about the best practices that we know work. We have research. We have practical experience. We know what needs to be done. The issue is, do we have the political will to make those decisions?
I support working hand in hand with the administration in a bipartisan way, with the parents and teachers and community leaders of our country, to make education a real national priority. But I cannot — I could not — support a bill that is a hollow, empty promise.
Let's do both. Let's increase accountability so we get better results by making sure we have the resources to hold our children and our teachers accountable. If we do that, then we will be setting the stage to leave no child behind. If we do any less, then I think we have missed a historic opportunity.

Certainly. My feelings go back many years. As the Senator knows, children have been my passion for more than 30 years. I have worked on improving and reforming education for nearly 20 years. I know how difficult it is, today, to try to help many of our children achieve educational competence.
The reason for that is that we are not living in the same world in which the Senator and I grew up. It is harder to teach our children. Our children come to school with more problems and more stress. They are exposed to many more things than we ever faced.
We have to understand that if we don't really provide the resources to reach the children as they are today, not as we wish they would be, not as we thought they were back when I was sitting there with my hands folded and listening to every word, but as they are today with all the other pressures that are on families and children, then we are not going to have the results and the kind of achievement to which the Senator from Minnesota is referring.
But there is no reason we have to make this choice. It is not an either/or choice. We have the resources to assist our local districts so they do not have to reach any deeper. Many of the districts from my State can't afford to raise their property taxes any more.
I was on Long Island last night talking to a group of about 1,000 people. I explained to them, if we have this large Federal income tax cut, and then we have these unfunded mandates for education, where is the rubber going to hit the road? It is going to hit the road in the local property tax levies.
I would rather be, I am sure, part of an administration that gets to take credit for cutting income taxes than the poor souls down at the local level having to vote to raise property taxes in order to meet the mandates they have put on them. I think we should not be raising false hopes. We should be looking at how we help every child be successful.

I think my colleague is absolutely right, because if we are looking at the comprehensive reform, we cannot leave out the funding of IDEA. We can't leave out doing something to help parents understand their obligations to be a child's first teacher and provide quality preschool.
I hear so much about the IDEA program, otherwise known as the special education program. I hear it mostly in suburban districts, interestingly enough, because suburban districts have activist parents and they know the law. The law is that we have to provide an education for every child. And I support that law. It was the first project I ever did for the Children's Defense Fund. I went door to door in communities back in — I hate to say — 1973 to find out where the children were because they weren't in school. We found a lot of children with disabilities who were being kept out of school.
I am a 100-percent supporter of mainstreaming our children and giving every child a chance. But we are bankrupting a lot of our suburban school districts. We are saying you have to provide special treatment and education for children who need it and deserve it. If that means you have to shut down the band program or only have one physics session or do away with art, that is the tough choice to make.
The Federal Government said in the 1970s that you have to provide this education. Furthermore, it is not only, as our colleague Tom Harkin likes to say, a Federal mandate, but it is a constitutional mandate to provide this quality education. The Federal Government is going to tell districts they have to provide special education. Where is the full funding so suburban districts and all other districts can try to keep up with their expenses?
I could not agree more with the second point the Senator made. Those of us who have been parents read to our children. We take them to museums. We get them a library card. We monitor their television. We worry about any kind of childcare arrangements. We know those early years make a difference. Why don't we make a commitment based on the resources we now have about the brain to do more to provide quality preschool opportunities both at home and outside the home so that more children can come to school ready to learn? That might be the very best investment we could make in terms of long-term academic success.

Mr. President, I appreciate the dialog that just occurred between the leaders because, certainly, it is critical that the debate on education commence and that we do everything within our power to provide more resources, greater opportunities, and accountability to our children around the country.
As a new Member to this body, I am one who shares the concern about actually seeing the language of the bill and trying to be sure that we know what it is we are debating and that the people back in our States who we represent have a chance to be part of this debate by being able to read and study and provide comments about what it is we are considering in the Senate. I know it may, from time to time, be a little frustrating, but until we actually have a bill with language that will determine the future of education funding from the Federal Government for 5 to 7 years, it is a wiser course for us to be prudent and thoughtful and to wait until we actually know what it is we are debating and what the potential impact of these provisions could be on the lives of real children. After all, this debate is going to set the stage for how much or how little we as a Nation will do for elementary, junior high, middle, and high schools.
I am particularly concerned about the impact we will have on our neediest children, those who are too often left behind. We still have too many children who are not reading at grade level and who are being taught by uncertified teachers, and too many who are in overcrowded classrooms and dilapidated school buildings. I know that all of us on both sides of the aisle agree that we can do better than this. We can't just sign a blank check or decide that we can proceed on bill language we have not even seen and discharge our responsibilities to the children we represent in this body.
Many of my colleagues and I have serious concerns about the substance of the bill. For example, the block grant demonstration program, so far as we are aware of it without having seen the language of it, does not target enough funds to our highest-need districts and will mean less control for local school districts on how best to invest their Federal education dollars. Because we have not yet seen the final version of the bill we are considering, we don't know whether there is a genuine commitment to devote the resources necessary to make the promise of greater accountability a realistic outcome.
Just as we expect teachers, administrators, and students to abide by a high standard of accountability, we should bring our backroom negotiations to the floor of the Senate for all of us to hear. That is why I voted to proceed with the bill. But we should do it on the basis of an actual bill. I, for one, am willing to wait and to be patient until we actually get the bill and then to proceed in an expeditious manner.
If we look at where the negotiations are and what we are attempting to achieve, we have a great opportunity to accomplish some very important goals for the people of this country. We all share the goal of improving our Nation's schools. We agree that everyone should be held more accountable for turning around failing schools. There is a bipartisan agreement that is very strong for ensuring that all children should be taught by high quality teachers and that parents should know the quality of the schools their children attend.
This bill, so far as it is reported to us, does a tremendous job of strengthening accountability. I applaud Senators Kennedy and Bingaman for leading the negotiations that have resulted in important accountability provisions.
Some have asked: Why don't we just call it quits. Let's just put in more accountability. Let's just test our children every year from third through eighth grade. We don't need to do any more than that.
I ask: What is it we are attempting to achieve? If all it does is to put more accountability on the already existing testing systems that every one of our States have employed, what is it we hope to achieve?
The answer is that in order to have real accountability, we have to marry those accountability measures with targeted additional resources, invested wisely, that will really make the difference as to whether the tests actually create better educational outcomes.
Resources would make a difference for children such as Delano Tucker, a fifth grader from PS 41 in the Bronx, who wrote me that his entire fifth grade class was asking for help to improve education. Here is what Delano said:
We need more books, but we can't do that without more money. My second reason is we need more teachers because classes are too crowded. The third reason is children are passing without knowing how to read.
We don't need to get a bunch of experts or Senators who can come up with a better analysis than what Delano just gave us. We need better teachers, more books, less crowded classrooms, and we should not be passing children who don't know how to read.
Resources would make a difference for the nearly 168,000 children who go to school every day in overcrowded classes in New York City. We are losing teachers every single day because teachers can't teach in the kind of circumstances that we are presenting for the state of education in many of our cities.
One New York City parent recently shared her thoughts with me, writing that:
I am a parent of two young children — one in kindergarten and one in third grade. They are both bright, but they suffer from learning difficulties, in part, because they are trying to learn in classes of 28 children. They are unable to get the individual attention they need because they are competing for the teacher's attention with so many.
How can we expect children in classes that are that crowded, given the difficulties and issues that children bring to school today, to be able to get the same quality of education that we know works so well when classes are smaller in the early grades?
Resources would have made a real difference for the fourth grade teacher at the 82-year-old Mechanicville Elementary School, just north of Albany, NY, who last year was struck in the head by concrete from the ceiling as she was teaching because the school was in such disrepair.
My colleagues and I have heard similar stories from students and teachers in every State around the country. Although education is, and always will be, a local issue, it has to be a national concern. Some of the most severe problems in education today require national solutions. I think that is why we are here today debating education.
How will investing in school repairs and renovations help to raise student achievement? I think the answer is self-evident, especially if you have a teacher hit in the head with concrete falling from the ceiling. We know from research that children benefit when they attend school buildings that are in good physical condition.
A 1996 study of large urban high schools in Virginia found that student achievement was as much as 11 percentile points lower in substandard buildings as compared to standard buildings.
Another study found that the quality of air inside public school facilities may significantly affect students' ability to concentrate. In fact, the evidence suggests that children under 10 are more vulnerable than adults to the types of contaminants found in school facilities. We have seen reports and studies about working conditions in urban schools, concluding that they "have direct positive and negative effects on teacher morale, their sense of personal safety, their feelings of effectiveness, and on the general learning environment." That kind of scientific conclusion is reinforced by the experience of students in Mount Vernon, NY, who go to school with air ducts that are so old and so clogged up and filled with pigeon and rat droppings that they can't even breathe decent air; or the students in Cohoes, NY, who go to a school that banned the use of chalk because they have inadequate ventilation, and the chalk dust would hang like a curtain in the air.
Too many of our students are trying to learn in cramped trailers such as in this photo taken in Queens. These may be so-called "temporary" trailers, but they can end up representing a big part of a child's educational experience.
Too many of our children are in hallways with many distractions and far too little room. This photo represents a common sight in schools in New York. This is not a classroom. This is a hallway. The children aren't in a classroom that you and I remember, where there is a chalk board, a teacher's desk, and the desks of the children, and bulletin boards with pretty displays. This is a hallway and this is their classroom.
I don't know how much longer we can keep hearing stories about hallway classrooms, falling concrete, conditions in the classroom that are unhealthy, and not recognize that we should be helping our school districts, many of which cannot possibly afford to raise their property taxes. We can't ask hard-pressed parents to put even more money into the property tax base. We should be helping the parents in those school districts.
During this debate, I will do everything I can to urge my colleagues to support Senator Harkin's efforts to include authorization for an emergency renovation and repair fund that would certainly make a difference for some of the schools we just saw.
I will also be offering my own amendment to examine the impact of dilapidated schools on the health of our children. It is simply unacceptable in America in the beginning of the 21st century that our children should have to attend schools that not only impair their ability to learn but even make them sick.

As the Senator points out, I have been involved in improving education and reforming our accountability measures since 1983, when "A Nation At Risk" was first issued by then-President Reagan's Commission on Education. I was one of the first in our country to ask for much stricter accountability, to test not only students but also teachers, and to hold schools to a very high standard. If they did not succeed in passing 85 percent of their children beyond a level of acceptable learning outcomes, the school would be in danger of being taken over. That was 18 years ago.
So there is really nothing new in what we are discussing today, as the Senator from Nevada knows so well. We want to do the best job we can in raising standards; yes, we do. That is something many of us have worked on, and we have actually seen some positive results in some of our schools over the last 18 years. But we know there have to be the kind of conditions in learning circumstances in our classes, in our schools, that will enable these accountability measures to be successful.

As the Senator knows, when somebody says money doesn't make a difference, they are talking about somebody else and somebody else's money. Every one of us in this body goes to the extra length of making sure that our children and any children we care about are given those kinds of resources that will enable a child to learn.
Money is not the only answer to what we need to do if we are serious about zeroing in on those children most in need. Most of our schools in this country are doing a fine job.
I live in a district in New York that is one of the best in the entire country. Many of the other districts in our suburbs and rural and city areas are producing good students who care about learning. Our real problems are in those areas with concentrated poverty.
I have seen the Senator from Connecticut come into the Chamber. He has a passion about getting our resources targeted where they can do the most good. So to anybody who says money is not the only answer, of course, I say money is not the only answer, but money helps when married to accountability and invested in getting rid of conditions such as the ones I am showing here on the picture where there are so many children in this classroom, where it is impossible for even the best trained teacher to be able to communicate effectively with these children. This is a classroom where the children are coming from backgrounds where English is not their first language, coming from concentrated poverty, often difficult family situations.
So when somebody says we don't want to throw money at it, I say, that's right. I want to target money to make sure we clean up our dilapidated classes and schools and that we provide lower class size so that the teachers who are willing to go into our hard-to-teach areas will be able to have a decent chance to reach these children; to recruit and retain teachers who come in with idealism and find themselves in situations such as this and within a year or two are gone.
For me, there isn't a contradiction here, as the Senator from Nevada knows so well. We need to have the kinds of accountability that is effective and will work but without the resources we are not going to be successful.
We are going to find, as I have said in the past, that we are just passing out thermometers in the midst of an epidemic. We are going to find that everybody has a raging fever, but we don't have the resources or the will to help them get well. We can do both. That is what this opportunity provides.
I appreciate the concern of the Senator from Nevada. We have to have a good debate. It is only fair, if we are asking that we invest more dollars in education from the Federal Government, we be able to justify the use of those dollars and we tell our constituents and our colleagues where they will go. I have pointed out they go to helping clean, repair, and construct schools we need. Second, they go to reducing class size. The situation shown in this picture is unacceptable.
We are under court order in New York City to have only certified teachers in the classes. That sounds great, and I am for it, but in order to have certified, qualified teachers go into a situation such as this, we will have to make a contract with these teachers that this situation will improve; they will find they will have a chance, actually, to teach; otherwise, they will vote with their feet and either leave to go to a suburban district where they are paid a lot more, in a lot better situation, or they will leave teaching altogether.
I am not talking about something that is anecdotal. We have research from Project STAR in Tennessee that demonstrates children assigned to smaller classes in grades K-3 received better grades, higher test scores, and were less likely to drop out of school or be held back through their entire educational careers. This is a research study that has gone on for 15 years in the entire State of Tennessee. I applaud the State because they made the investment to evaluate what they were doing.
We found that the children who benefited the most were poor and minority children. By all means, test them and find out if they are failing. But be fair and give them a chance to succeed. That is what we are calling for when we ask for reduced class sizes.
We know if we don't recruit teachers we will not be able to continue teaching anybody. Right now we have a national crisis when it comes to recruiting and retaining teachers. There isn't any more important factor than teacher quality in improving student achievement. Yet if you are a young teacher placed in a situation such as this, if your classroom is a hallway, as I have seen in some schools in New York, a closet, that makes it very difficult to teach.
I recently heard from a constituent in Farmingdale, NY, who told me their elementary school alone needs 16 new teachers for kindergarten. In Buffalo, 231 teachers retired last year, compared with an average of 92 retirees in each of the preceding 8 years.
We can't just mandate that school districts go out and hire certified, qualified teachers without providing some resources to make that possible. We tried that in New York City. The court order said hire only certified teachers and put those certified teachers into the classes where the kids are most at risk. So the school district went out, hired 2,000 certified teachers, assigned them to schools as depicted in this picture and the previous pictures, and the 2,000 certified teachers wouldn't take the job. Who can blame them? They are certified teachers, qualified; they pass the tests; they have taken the courses; they are assigned to a school where the conditions to teach are impossible.
If we are going to say let's only have certified, qualified teachers, then for goodness' sake, provide help to districts such as those I represent so we can actually recruit and keep those certified, qualified teachers. I strongly believe this bill should include a teacher recruitment section. I am working with a bipartisan group to offer an amendment to help school districts meet the demands for certified teachers.
Let me turn now to title I. I would like to paint a picture of what full funding for title I means for the children of New York City. Yesterday, several of my colleagues from the other side of the aisle came to the floor to talk about the failure of title I to improve student learning and dismissed the idea that fully funding title I could result in increased student achievement.
I want to be sure the American people have the facts about title I. The real fact, as presented by the independent, nonpartisan Congressional Research Service, is that in fiscal year 2001 Congress provided school districts with only one-third of the resources needed to fully serve eligible students in order to help close the achievement gap. Even with this limited Federal investment, our school districts have shown real gains in reading and math.
In 1999, the Council of Great City Schools found fourth and eighth graders in urban schools boosted their performance in reading and math. In fact, 87.5 percent of the urban school districts showed reading gains in Title I schools and 83 percent showed math gains. Moreover, the study found that the percentage of title I students in urban schools below the 25th percentile had been declining over 2- and 3-year periods while the percentage of title I students between the 25th and 50th percentile was increasing.
There are those who will still deny these facts and make the claim that title I doesn't make a difference. I often think Washington is the only evidence-free zone in our country. The facts are the facts. Title I does make a difference. Imagine the results if cities such as New York, Buffalo, Rochester, or Syracuse were able to assist all our title I eligible students rather than just a third of them. It would mean, for example, in New York City, we could lower the current threshold and serve an additional 99,295 children. The city could invest in strategies that work better. We could provide extended time initiatives that we know make a difference with children. We could expand early literacy intervention, and intervention strategies, have classroom professional development for teachers.
As we look at the bill, we need to look at a full investment in title I. It is not just a game of imagination but a real investment in student improvement that will pay off down the road. I will support Senator Dodd and Senator Collins in their efforts to include full funding of title I in this bill.
Finally, let me touch on the issue of testing. In 1983, I called for student tests, high-stake student and high-stake teacher tests. I take a back seat to no one when it comes to using testing and other measures of accountability to find out how well we are doing and hold ourselves accountable. But let's be sure the tests are actually going to accomplish the purpose for which they are intended. We need to look at how children do from year to year, to help teachers modify and individualize curriculum, and provide parents with timely information. We have to make sure that if they take a test in the winter, they get the results that winter, not the following fall when the children have moved on. We have to help schools know what the standard should be so they are not teaching to the tests but they are trying to measure the standards they have set. And we have to help pay for the tests.
In New York alone, it would cost $16 million to comply with these new Federal testing requirements. Only $8 million would be provided by the Federal Government; the other $8 million is from scarce State resources. We need to be sure we are fair to our States. If we are going to mandate testing, let's not make it an unfunded mandate. Let's provide the resources needed. If we do develop and implement the tests, we need to have the resources to ensure that our children from the most disadvantaged circumstances can pass and excel in those tests. I think that means smaller classrooms, modern schools, quality teachers.
As we go forward in this debate, I hope we will think hard about the impact we will have on our children, and that we do everything we possibly can to make sure we don't just pass a bill but we really do provide the resources to reform education and produce better results across our country.
I yield the floor.

Mr. President, I associate myself with a number of the points made by my friend from Arkansas. Clearly, what we are attempting to do is to put the emphasis on what works and to provide to our children the opportunity to have the best possible education.
I have been very privileged over the last 20 years to know quite a bit about education in Arkansas, which my good friend has the privilege of representing, and now I know a lot about education in New York. I have no doubt that my friend, were he still here, would agree with me that our goals are the same for the children in both States. We want to provide the best possible educational opportunities, but we face very different challenges.
What I saw and worked on for many years in improving education in Arkansas, which was one of the great honors of my life, is very different from what I now see day in and day out in New York City, where we have more than a million children in our school system.
I agree with my friend that what we are crafting is an approach that will give to local school districts, parents, and teachers the tools to make the right decisions for the children whose futures they hold in their hands. That is why I wish my friend were still here — and I will seek him out later to talk with him privately about this.
That is why I am such a strong supporter of Senator Murray's amendment because what Senator Murray has done is point out very clearly that one size does not fit all; that what we need to do is provide the tools that will enable each school district in each State to deal with the problems they face.
So I want to be part of passing legislation, in a bipartisan way, that will be the best for Arkansas, the best for Washington, the best for Vermont, and the best for New York because we will have honestly looked at all the different tools we need to provide our local educational authorities with in order that they can do the job we are now asking them to do their very best in achieving.
So I am very proud to be a cosponsor of this amendment and to stand with my colleague in stating my commitment to supporting the Class Size Reduction Initiative, both because it is voluntary and provides additional funding to schools that are in desperate need of such funding and, maybe most important, because we know it works.
I went back and reread President Bush's blueprint for education called "No Child Left Behind." In it, he expresses dismay that over the years Congress has developed programs without asking whether or not programs produce results or even knowing the impact on local needs. Later on, the President goes on to suggest that under his education plan, which is really the core of what we are debating in this education debate, he will focus on what works and ensure that Federal dollars will be spent on effective, research-based programs and practices and that the funds will be targeted to improve schools and enhance teacher quality. That is certainly what the committee on which I am proud to serve, under the leadership of the Senator from Vermont, attempted to do in reporting out such a bill — to focus on what works and to target funds to improve our schools and enhance teacher quality. President Bush and I absolutely agree on this point.
I have often said that I sometimes fear Washington is an evidence-free zone where, despite whatever evidence we have, we don't follow it, we don't put it to work, and we spin our wheels too much. Well, I believe we should look at what works, what has had a positive impact in raising student achievement, what has helped at the local level give very necessary resources; there is no better example of what works than reducing class sizes so that teachers can teach and children can learn.
Allow me just a moment to review the research demonstrating that reducing class size has proven results. Teachers who teach in classes of 18 students or fewer in the early grades are helping to raise student achievement for our most educationally disadvantaged students who are attending schools in high-poverty neighborhoods, where we all know it is harder to teach.
Senator Murray was a teacher. She was on a school board. I don't think any of us should kid ourselves; there are some school districts and some schools where it is just hard to teach, where children come to school with all kinds of challenges and difficulties. We know, as we look at the research done, that if we focus on getting that class size down with a qualified teacher — this should not be an either/or; it should be a qualified teacher and a small enough class size — then we can have very positive results.
I particularly point to the work Senator Murray and I highlighted in a press conference a few weeks ago that was done at Princeton University by an economist named Dr. Alan Krueger, who tracked the performance of well over 11,000 elementary school students at 79 schools in a Tennessee pilot program known as Project STAR. This was done randomly. The results are scientifically provable. What he found, and what everyone who has studied it has found, is that smaller class sizes have a tremendously positive impact on student performance and, particularly, on African American students.
We want to be supporting both excellence and equity. That is why I support accountability. I think we should know what our children know and what they don't know. I also believe everyone in this Chamber understands that we have to do more to increase the opportunity for excellence by focusing on the students who are most likely to be left behind. To me, the fact that African American students have such positive results from lower class size is a very strong argument for us renewing this commitment. There are other studies which have found exactly the same thing. A Rand study — and Rand usually studies issues such as the military and defense and national security — focused on cost-effectiveness of educational resources in raising scores on the NAEP, the National Assessment of Educational Progress. It is a test that is given to a randomly selected group of our students across the country. We use it to track how well we are doing as a nation.
What Rand found in looking behind these test scores was that the higher scores could be traced to investments in lower class sizes in the early grades — plus, higher prekindergarten participation, lower teacher turnover, and higher levels of teacher resources. So it is that complement of cost-effective strategies that I think we should be supporting in this legislation.
Later in the debate, I will focus on the importance of supporting early learning opportunities and trying to retain our teachers because we are losing our teachers at an alarming rate. I brought this photo of P.S. 19 in Jackson Heights, Queens, which is one of the magnets for immigration into our country. People come to Kennedy or LaGuardia Airports and they end up in Queens. I wish I could take every Member of this body to the schools I visit in Queens where bathrooms are classes, hallways are classes, and where children speak 40 to 100 different languages, where they are packed in there and where a teacher, despite her best efforts, can't possibly connect with all these children.
Yesterday, I was in a school that works in Manhattan, the New Manhattan School. It is a wonderful school. I met for a long time with the teachers, the principal, and the superintendent of the district. It is an old building, built in 1904. It is packed to the rafters. They are adding teachers into classrooms so if they do not have the additional classrooms, at least they have more qualified teachers in those classes so the children get the attention of the adult responsible for their learning.
It is important we understand there have to be opportunities for local communities to make choices. I believe having this tool is essential for providing good opportunities for choices to be made.
With the funds appropriated in 2001, it is expected the Federal Government's Class Size Reduction Initiative will bring nearly 40,000 qualified teachers into classrooms. Any one of us who goes into a large city in our country knows that if we do not have qualified teachers and we do not have low class sizes, we can test until the cows come home and we are not going to find anything other than what we already know: that children from high-poverty areas, from dysfunctional backgrounds without adequate training for academic work are not going to do well, but that a qualified teacher working with a small enough group of children, as Senator Murray knows so well, can make all the difference in that child's future.
When we looked at this issue in New York City, we saw the results clearly. Two years ago, the program was initiated and class sizes in New York City were 25 percent larger than statewide. With both Federal and State initiatives, we were able to reduce class size for approximately 90,000 students in the early grades, almost 30 percent of the city's K-3 population.
I want people to keep in mind, I am talking about a million children and 90,000 children. I know it is hard for some people who represent States without that many people in the State or maybe only half that many to understand we are dealing with huge numbers in a lot of the large cities. It is not just the numbers; it is the real lives behind those numbers.
When we looked at the results, after 2 years of efforts, we were very pleased because achievement went up in those classrooms where, with Federal help, we were able to add a teacher.
That does not mean the local communities do not have to continue doing their part, and it does not mean the State does not have to do its part, but we have gotten behind in what we need to do for our children. We need all hands on deck. We need everybody pulling together. Education is a local responsibility in our country, but we all know it has to be a national priority.
Let us make sure we focus on both teacher quality and lower class size. That is why this amendment, which Senator Murray has championed and has been successful in persuading a bipartisan group of Senators to support in the past, is a critical component of this legislation.
If we can make it possible for class sizes to remain small in the early grades, we improve the chances dramatically of producing a productive, functioning citizen who can find his or her way in this complicated society and global economy that awaits them in the 21st century.
Yesterday, when I was in this wonderful school that was filled to the brim, they took me into a bathroom that had been turned into a guidance counselor's office. They did not have any other space. We went into the gym and children were doing their physical activity which I believe in strongly. We have to keep children's bodies active as well as their minds.
There was a partitioned area in which there were more offices. They were making the best of a very difficult situation. They had just been told a school down the block, a little elementary school, had been condemned. We will get to that later in this debate, too. This school had been condemned. It is unsafe for our children and teachers.
There is a school in Mechanicsville, NY, where a piece of concrete fell on a teacher's head while teaching in the classroom.
There is a condemned school a few blocks from where I was yesterday. They are already packed. The school I visited will be taking in the children from that condemned school.
This is a critical component of the commitment to excellence and equity, accountability, and resources that the President has called for which so many in this Chamber have championed for many years. We have the money to do this. We just have to determine whether we have the will.
I call on my colleagues, and echo the very eloquent call of the Senator from Washington, that we recognize that continuing this initiative does help local communities meet the needs they see right in front of them and let us make sure we do everything possible to make every child believe he or she is important so that at the end of this debate the bill we pass truly will leave no child behind.
I thank the Chair. I yield back my time.

Mr. President, today, I am so pleased to join my good friends, Senator Hutchison from Texas and Senator Bayh from Indiana, in supporting this legislation to help Medicare payments keep pace with the rising costs of hospital care, and to halt further Medicare reductions to teaching hospitals.
Our hospitals are under tremendous strain. They face soaring costs from nearly every direction: The growing number of uninsured individuals coupled with the devastating shortages of skilled health care workers. The struggle to afford skyrocketing pharmaceuticals prices, while simultaneously investing in emerging needs, such as information technology. At the same time, reductions in Medicare payments have hindered hospitals' ability to respond to these increased demands. How can we expect patients to receive quality health care when we're asking our hospitals to do more with so much less?
As you know, this week we are focusing on the crisis around the shortage of nurses. Ninety-one percent of hospitals in New York State report shortages of registered nurses, RNs. But this is really just the tip of the iceberg. The shortages in the health care workforce permeate the entire health care system, especially our hospitals. There are shortages in pharmacists, technicians, nurse aides, billing staff, and housekeepers that have all negatively impacted the quality of care New Yorkers are able to receive.
As a representative of the State of New York, I am especially troubled by the growing strains that our hospitals have been forced to contend with on top of the devastating cuts that have resulted from the balanced budget agreement of 1997, BBA. I have heard numerous firsthand accounts of the adverse impact on New York hospitals and the facts speak for themselves: In the 2 years following the BBA, New York hospitals' financial health ranked worst in the Nation. In fact, almost two-thirds of New York hospitals had negative operating margins last year. And in addition to the workforce shortage affecting health providers nationwide, New York providers are also confronting labor costs increases of 5-7 percent a year, while the Medicare rates for inpatient hospital rates, even with the full market basket update we are seeking in today's legislation, expected to rise only around 3.1 percent.
In recent years, Congress has successfully provided some short-term relief to address areas where the cuts enacted in the BBA of 1997 went much further than intended. However, much of the relief merely postponed scheduled cuts in Medicare payments and that is why the legislation that we are introducing today is so important.
This legislation today would eliminate some of those previously delayed cuts. First, it would restore the market basket update for inpatient hospital rates to the full level, rather than market-basket minus 0.55 percent, as scheduled for fiscal year 2002 and 2003. This important step will help hospitals nationwide keep up with the rising costs of inpatient care for Medicare beneficiaries. This provision helps all hospitals in New York State by increasing inpatient hospital payments across the board.
I am especially pleased that this legislation would also address the cuts faced by teaching hospitals to their Medicare indirect medical education payments. Teaching hospitals are the crown jewels of our Nation's health care system and play a vital role in making our system one of the finest in the world.
We rely on them to train physicians and nurses, care for the sickest of the sick and the poorest of the poor, and engage in research and clinical trials. Thanks to the research, for example, at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, cancer patients will suffer less while receiving chemotherapy because of a drug that was developed there.
As my predecessor and friend, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, in whose footsteps I am so honored to be following, put it so well a few years ago, "We are in the midst of a great era of discovery in the medical science. It is certainly not a time to close medical schools. This great era of medical discovery is occurring right here in the United States . . . And it is centered in New York City."
This legislation that we are introducing today would address the cuts faced by teaching hospitals to their Medicare indirect medical education payments. Last year's Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits Improvement Act of 2000, BIPA, provided some relief by delaying the cuts to help teaching hospitals cover the costs of caring for sicker, more complicated patients. Today's provision would make that relief permanent by freezing the indirect medical education adjustments percentage at 6.5 percent.
In addition, teaching hospitals throughout the State would benefit, including rural hospitals such as Kingston Hospital, Benedictine Hospital, Champlain Valley Physicians Hospital Medical Center, Olean General Hospital, and Hepburn Medical Center in Ogdensburgh, NY.
Today's legislation is essential to ensuring that our Nation's older and disabled patients can continue to receive the high quality of care that they deserve. I look forward to working with my colleagues and the administration to address this and other important health care priorities.

Mr. President, I rise today to honor the career of an outstanding soldier and a good friend, Lieutenant General Daniel W. Christman, who is retiring after more than thirty-six years of active military service. General Christman's exemplary military career, culminating in five years as the Commanding General and Superintendent of the United States Military Academy at West Point, exemplifies the professionalism and seriousness of purpose that have helped make the U.S. military the best in the world.
Prior to his service at the United States Military Academy, General Christman had a remarkable military career for over 30 years. General Christman graduated first in his class from West Point and later taught in the Department of Social Sciences as an Assistant Professor of Economics. He has held several senior executive positions in the Army, all of which have taken advantage of his unique talents for creative leadership and strategic vision. Using his training in civil engineering, he has commanded a major U.S. Army Corps of Engineer District in Savannah Georgia and headed the Army's Engineer School in the early 1990s.
Throughout his distinguished career, General Christman has played a vital role in development and implementation of some of the most important security policy issues of the last several decades. He served in the Ford Administration as a member of the National Security Council Staff. During the Gulf War, he directed a strategic planning group which advised the Army's Chief of Staff on war prosecution policies. He represented the U.S. in Brussels, Belgium as a member of NATO's Military Committee where he had active involvement in the historic expansion of NATO, pursuing peace in the Balkans and military dialogue with Russia. Immediately before arriving at West Point, General Christman served for two years as Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon. In that position he advised the Secretary of State on a broad range of issues, including arms control with Russia and Middle East peace negotiations between Israel and Syria.
General Christman's tenure as the 55th Superintendent of the U.S. Military Academy has been marked by a forward thinking strategic vision and the development of a more cooperative and positive environment at the Academy. I met with General Christman soon after I was sworn in as Senator and have been greatly impressed by his leadership at West Point. His success at obtaining critical funding support has enabled West Point to continue to attract high quality young cadets willing to embark on Army careers. He helped to raise funds for the Center for the Professional Military Ethic, as well as endowments for several academic department chairs and improved athletic facilities. He helped to inspire the creation of a dynamic and forward-looking Strategic Vision for the U.S. Military Academy 2010.
General Christman's exemplary service and devotion to duty, honor and country have left a lasting impact on the U.S. Military Academy, and indeed the U.S. Army. His numerous awards reflect the respect and admiration of those who have had the privilege to serve with him. I join my fellow Senators in wishing General Christman the best of luck in his future endeavors and my sincerest gratitude for his distinguished service to his country. 

Mr. President, I am a big believer in the importance of testing students. I think that testing has an essential and appropriate role in the curriculum of any educational system. I think there is no doubt that we have to test in order to determine whether or not students are meeting high academic standards. It would be a delight, I suppose, to most students who think that we are not going to test them but, indeed, we are.
I think this debate and what the Senator from Minnesota is attempting to bring our attention to is that there are "tests" and there are "tests." Making sure that the tests are used for the purpose of measuring student performance, determining what kind of additional help a student might need, is really what we are focused on through the Senator's amendment.
I appreciated very much Chairman Jeffords' important amendment that we voted on last week to make sure we have Federal support, financial support, behind the design and implementation of these tests because we want to send a clear message to States and local districts that we believe in accountability, but we want to put some dollars behind that belief by saying we want you to design and implement tests that are going to really measure what students learn.
Right now, many teachers who contact my office, or the ones I see when I visit schools, as I did on Monday in New York City, are terribly concerned that what might very well happen is that more and more testing will be piled on without there being any requirement that they be worthwhile tests and without the resources to assist the teachers — who, after all, are on the front lines in the classrooms — in knowing how best to address the needs of their students that are revealed by the tests.
I was very impressed by this document put out by the Committee for Economic Development. My colleagues know that the Committee for Economic Development is a group of business people in our country. They are very committed to creating the conditions that will further economic development, and they know that one of the key conditions, if not the most important one, is the quality of our education. Looking at the board of trustees and the Committee for Economic Development, we have people from the leading corporations in America who see firsthand what their employees need when they come into the workplace, who are on the front lines of hiring people for a job. They have put out a publication that I really commend to my colleagues, to the administration, and to all of us who are concerned about using testing to improve student learning. It is called "Measuring What Matters." It makes many of the same points that Senator Wellstone makes.
It might be somewhat surprising for some of the people who serve on the board of trustees for the Committee for Economic Development to know that they agree with Senator Wellstone, but they do. They agree that what we need are tests that will actually improve student learning. That certainly is what the intent of the bill that we reported out of the Health Committee under Chairman Jeffords' leadership was aimed at doing. How do we make it clear that tests are a means, they are not an end, in school reform. We don't just give the tests and pick out winners and losers. We have never done that in the United States — one of the reasons our educational system is both unique and successful and has been for decades despite our problems, which we talk about endlessly. We should look at some of the reasons why we have been successful.
I would rank near the top of that the flexibility of our educational system. We don't give a test when a child is 11 years old and say, all right, this group of children, you are consigned to a certain set of occupations; this other group, you did well on the 11-year-old test, so we are going to send you to different schools and put you on a different path.
We don't test when children are 14 and make that conclusion. We don't say that there are some children who can only attend certain kinds of courses in certain schools and others are barred because of tests. We don't have the kind of one-test determination that opens the doors or shuts them in colleges in other parts of the world. I think that has served us well in our country.
There are a lot of people who don't take school seriously until they are in high school. Sometimes they graduate and maybe then find their way to a community college. Then they really get energized; they know what they want to learn. So we have always viewed tests not as a stop sign for a child the system holds up and says: You are a loser; you don't know anything. We use them to say: Look, we need to help. How can we provide more support for you to be able to get the most out of your education?
I think it is important for us to remember that tests are not an end; they are a means. They should be a means toward lifelong learning or improving the climate for learning or for giving individuals the tools they need to be successful, not just in the classroom but in life.
It is also important, as the Committee for Economic Development points out, that tests need to be valid and reliable and equitable. There should not be any doubt that I think any good test would meet those three criteria. First of all, validity: Are we measuring what we intend to measure? If we spend the whole year teaching children one set of facts or studying one set of subjects and we test on something else, that is not a valid test. So we need to make sure that what we measure is what we are teaching, and what we are teaching is in some way reflective of the standards of what we expect from our educational system.
Reliability is also a given. How consistent and dependable are the assessment results? Are these tests that teachers and parents and students and community leaders can depend on because they really reflect what we want our children to know?
Finally, are they equitable tests? That doesn't mean there are two standards, one for certain children who live in affluent suburbs and one for children who live in our poorest neighborhoods. No, if we are doing anything with this effort, it is to try to make sure we combine both excellence and equity and we do everything possible to give the opportunities where they are most needed.
We know we have to be very careful that our tests are fair, that they have no sign of bias toward any group of students. We need the help the Federal Government should provide if they are going to stand behind the regimen of testing we are considering in this bill.
We also need to be sure, if we are going to be using tests, that we get timely results. I offered an amendment in the committee. If tests are going to be given, the results ought to be available in 30 days and no more. What is the point of giving a test in April and you get the results in June or July when the children have gone home or may not get them until the following year?
We should have a sensible testing schedule, and we should require that the results be provided in a timely manner to parents, students, and especially our teachers if they are going to be used for diagnostic purposes and to measure and grade the curriculum as well as the children.
There are a lot of tests that are currently being administered. We give tests for everything now. We give tests for graduation. We give tests for promotion. We ought to be sensible about this. If the Federal Government, through our actions in the Congress and the administration, are going to say we want a test every year from third to eighth grade to determine how effective our children are learning reading and mathematics, then States have to take a hard look at what else they are testing because it is getting so that many of our schools feel they are spending all their time preparing for tests, administering tests, and grading tests. We have to be sure the tests are appropriate in number as well as content.
I also hope as we move forward on this important education debate that we recognize that accountability for students and teachers is best tied to school performance. I go into schools all the time that are literally within blocks of each other. Some are very successful and some are not. A lot of it has to do with how the school is organized and what their priorities are. I hope the testing we are discussing to be implemented in this bill will help us move entire schools toward better outcomes so that we lift up the performance of a school and create the atmosphere that will be conducive to learning and teaching.
One thing that bothers me, though, is that in our rush for tests and in our implementation of so many tests, a lot of schools are finding it impossible to keep the more well-rounded curriculum that has been the hallmark of American education.
I believe music, art, physical education, extracurricular activities, even field trips, are a part of the educational process. What I hear from so many schools in my State is that the tests take up so much time. The costs of the tests and all that goes with the tests mean that a lot of other important educational objectives are being eliminated.
I hope we take a view of testing that puts it into the context of American education generally. I take a back seat to no one in saying education has to be a local responsibility and a national priority. I have had experience in advocating for testing.
I believe I was the first person in the country who advocated testing teachers, using high-stakes tests. I even recommended schools be based on their performance in how many students they could bring up to grade level. But I am very cautious — and I guess I am putting up a caution light — that we not go so much toward testing as the definition of education that we forget what the learning process is and how unique the American education system is where people can literally wake up in 10th grade or 12th grade or a child can be exposed to art or music or some other part of the curriculum, such as a good science lab in the eighth grade, and all of a sudden learning becomes real and they are not consigned to a second-class citizenship because they did not get into gear before that time.
We are starting to see, with our high-stakes testing in New York, a lot of dropouts. We are worried we are beginning to see an increase in dropouts. We have to take that seriously. Our goal is not to test children for the sake of testing, then telling them they do not measure up, and then holding them back for the sake of holding them back until they become so frustrated and discouraged they leave the educational system. I do not think that is the goal of any of us in this Chamber.
Our goal is to have an accountability system so that we actually know what is being taught and what our children are learning, and use it for diagnostic purposes to make every child a success.
Raising the caution lights that the amendment of the Senator from Minnesota raises is important for us to think about. I will add one additional caution light. I guess that is the biggest issue of all for me, and that is the resources. I am very concerned, as I will state when we come to this in the days ahead, about the budget. We have been promised it will leave no child behind and will provide the resources for extra testing, to deal with special ed, to deal with more resources for our poorest children, to add teachers so we have lower class sizes, to modernize classrooms. I am worried that none of that will be in the budget.
That puts many of us in a very difficult position because we know that accountability is necessary, but we also know that resources in our poorest schools are an absolute necessary condition for a lot of our kids to be successful.
I enjoyed listening to the Senator from Wyoming talk about the very small school districts of fewer than 50 children. I have some very fond memories of districts that small in Arkansas. I remember going to graduating classes of three and four children. That is a very different and wonderful educational experience. I hope we never get away from that in our country; that we do have schools that are that small in States from Wyoming to upstate New York.
I come from a State that has some different kinds of problems. I have a school system with a million children. I have school systems, such as that of Buffalo, where the school stock is so old they cannot wire them for computers because the buildings were built like forts.
I visited a school called the Black Rock Academy that was built in 1898, last renovated in 1920. They are bewildered about what to do. They cannot figure out how to get those computers set up. They have wires coming up, going in a window, into a little room. They have about 30 computers, only 10 of which can be connected to the Internet. That is the best they can do under the circumstances. Buffalo has undertaken, using State dollars and local dollars, a tremendous school renovation and modernization program.
Our needs in New York are different than the needs of the small districts in Wyoming. I hope we are going to look at all of our children from coast to coast and all of our local school districts to figure out what we can do to make everybody successful. Resources are key. It is more difficult to provide education in remote rural areas and in very concentrated poor areas in our inner cities. We need a bill and we need the resources in the bill that empower local communities to make the decisions that are best for them.
There is a wonderful menu of opportunities in the bill where people can choose professional development or technology, but we would really be selling our children short if we do not also include lower class size and school modernization because in the absence of some Federal help on those two issues, much of what we want to achieve is going to be very difficult and beyond the reach of many of our districts, even those that are making a good-faith effort, such as Buffalo, to deal with a very old stock of schools.
I kid some of my colleagues. We were educating people in some communities in New York before some of the States represented in this body were States. We were building schools before a lot of people had to build schools because of the centuries of history in New York. We have some of those schools that have been around a very long time.
Good education can and does occur in those schools. But the conditions are worsening to the point where, as I said the other day, we have concrete falling out of a ceiling, hitting a teacher on the head. We have overcrowded classrooms. If we are going to be seeking both excellence and equity, we have to do more to provide the resources all districts need to do the job they want to do for their children.
This is a very important issue that goes right to the heart of this budget. I, along with many of my colleagues, was very disturbed to learn there was no increase for education in the budget coming back from the House. This body voted in a bipartisan way for important measures that were attached to the budget. This was not just about numbers; it was about values, the value of making sure we put the dollars into our education system and many other important priorities, from defense to food safety.
The budget coming back does not reflect that. It does not reflect the flexibility for the dollars that will be needed to do what we have already voted for in the Senate.
I was very proud of the vote that said we need to fund special education. It is about as close as we can get to a mandate. A lot of school districts are under tremendous pressure because they cannot afford to do what they need to do. I was proud of this body for voting to fully fund title I. That was a values statement. It said our values are that we will invest in our poorest children. I was proud of our chairman's amendment that if the Federal Government puts this requirement of testing on our districts, the Federal Government should help to pay for the development and implementation of those tests.
This body, in a bipartisan way, made some very important values statements about education — not that we were just going to pass a bill that sounded good but one that could actually produce results. I am very pleased that at least in the Senate we are crafting a bill that I think will make a difference in the lives of our children. If we continue on this path, it could revolutionize education across our country. But it cannot be seen in isolation from the budget which, after all, carries the resources that will determine whether we have anything other than an empty promise.
I appreciate the opportunity to add my voice to what we are trying to do in this Chamber and to look for ways to work with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to make sure it is real.

Mr. President, I thank my ranking member, the Senator from North Dakota, who, as my good friend from South Carolina has put so well, has led with honesty and directness, and believes so passionately in the issues that we are addressing today.
I rise because I cannot remain silent in the face of both a budget process and a budget product that I think will be so harmful to our country. I really wish I did not have to rise today. I wish, given the opportunities that lie before us as a nation, what we were debating was the kind of balanced approach to the budget that I could wholeheartedly support — a balanced approach that included an affordable, reasonable tax cut, that fairly went to all Americans, giving every one of our families a Mother's Day present, as Senator Byrd so wonderfully reminded us is around the corner.
I wish this budget were filled with the kind of careful analysis about the investments that we need to make our country rich and smarter and stronger in the years ahead. And I wish this budget continued to pay down the debt in the way that we had been doing.
In the last 3 years, we paid off more than $600 billion of our debt. We took it off the backs of all these schoolchildren who are watching us. We said: We are not going to pass on the debts of your parents. Your grandparents, the greatest generation, did not leave us in debt the way that this country did in the 1980s with the quadrupling of our national debt. I cannot stand here and say that.
I look at all these faces. I meet with schoolchildren from throughout New York nearly every day. I wish I could say: I am going to go to the Senate Chamber and support a budget that will invest in education the way we need it, that will continue to pay down the debt so that you are not faced with that debt when you are my age, or even younger, and that it will invest in Social Security and Medicare so that you do not have to worry about your parents, your grandparents, or yourselves. Unfortunately, I cannot say that.
I have thought hard about what it is that has happened in the Senate in the last several months because I sat through 16 hearings in the Budget Committee. They were informative, very helpful hearings, laying out the priorities of our Nation, talking about the amount of money we had that we could count on, not pie in the sky, not projections that were unlikely ever to come true but realistically what it was we, as a nation, could count on. And then how could we have a tax cut, pay down the debt, and invest in education, health care, the environment, as well as taking care of Social Security and Medicare?
I do not exactly know what happened, how we arrived at this point. We had those hearings, and then we were shut out of the process. We did not have a markup, which is a device in a committee to get everybody together to try to hammer out a bill.
Then the Democrats, with decades of experience — with distinguished Senators such as Senator Hollings and Senator Conrad — were shut out of the process between the House and the Senate.
So here we are today on the brink of passing a tax cut that will, I believe, do to our country what was done in the 1980s. I can only think that this is a tax cut proposal that was born in the passion of a primary political campaign, in the snows of New Hampshire, when the President was running for his life to be President and had to come up with something, so he plucked out of the air $1.6 trillion and said that was what it was going to be and felt compelled to come and present it to us.
I was proud of the Senate when, in the process of the budget debate, we made some good changes. We made those changes not only on the tax cut side but on the investment side. I thought: If the House can go along with that, maybe at the end of the process we can have a better balance. I did not think it went far enough, but I was proud of the fact that we had a negotiation.
What we have today has zero increases in education. We have spent a heck of a long time talking about education. The President says it is his first priority. I can only look at the documents I am handed. I have only been handed them recently. I was not part of the process, even though I serve on the Budget Committee. And it looks to me as if we are turning our back on education.
As I thought back, I could not think of any analogy, I could not think of any guidance that would help illuminate what it is we are going through. So I went back and looked at 1981. I read about what happened when another President said: Pass this big tax cut, and we are going to have surpluses. And we went further and further and further in debt.
It is always easier to pass a tax cut. Who doesn't want a tax cut? I want a tax cut. But I don't want to have a tax cut at the expense of hurting my country. I don't want a tax cut at the expense of preventing the kind of investment in education that we need. I don't want a tax cut where I have to go and tell my mother that Medicare may not be viable for the rest of her natural life. I don't want that kind of tax cut.

So I, with great regret, stand in this Chamber and express the disappointment I feel in that we had an opportunity to do what our country needs — to invest in education, health care, the environment, pay down our debt, and provide affordable tax cuts — but, instead, we are taking a U-turn back to the 1980s. Mark my words, we will be back here — maybe under the same President, or maybe under a different President — having to fix the fiscal situation we are throwing our country into today. I lived through that once. I do not look forward to it. But I will be a responsible Member of this body in trying to fix the problem that we are causing for our Nation because of this tax cut and budget.
Thank you, Mr. President.

Mr. President, on April 22, 2001 I delivered a statement before the Warsaw Ghetto Resistance Organization's, WAGRO, Annual Tribute to the Martyrs of the Warsaw Ghetto, at Temple Emanuel in New York City. I ask unanimous consent that my remarks be printed in the Record along with the statement delivered on the same day by Mr. Benjamin Mead, President of the Warsaw Ghetto Resistance Organization, 

Mr. President, I thank the Senator from Washington. I rise to express my very strong support for Senator Murray's class size reduction amendment.
I have been in this Chamber several times in the last weeks talking about class size and have shown numerous pictures of conditions in the classes in the schools in New York. I have listened to the extraordinary description of other colleagues as to what their students and teachers face day in and day out because of overcrowded classrooms.
I know we will be making decisions that determine the opportunities for our educational achievement for our students for years to come when we vote on this amendment and on the bill of which I hope it will be a part.
I have to reiterate several points and call on my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to look at the evidence. I do believe sometimes in Washington we live in an evidence-free zone. It does not matter who comes up with whatever scientific research or evidence. If it runs against any particular political point of view, it is not given the seriousness it deserves.
I do not see how we can turn our backs on the evidence that we have from study after study that lower class size, when it comes to teaching children from disadvantaged backgrounds, makes all the difference.
Sometimes my colleagues say: But there are schools that do a good job with more students, and I remember when I was in school and we had a lot of students.
I can remember that, too. I started school when we had three television networks. I can remember when we had more two-parent families. I can remember when we did not have all of the social and cultural interference with raising children that we now face.
The fact is, we have to take our kids where they are today, and many of them today are coming from situations where they need more attention, more adult time, more discipline, more guidance in order to be academically successful.
We are turning our backs not only on the research which points that out time and again but on these children. I hope my colleagues who have not seen fit to support this amendment will reconsider it. It is not too late to cast a vote for the kinds of classrooms where teachers can teach and children can learn.
If you look at our big States with big cities — and I know New York has obviously a special set of issues because of the size of our school district in New York City, but it is not unique. In Pennsylvania, for example, the average class size in Philadelphia is 30 children per class. In Pittsburgh, it is 25 children per class. In Chicago, it averages 28. In Georgia, it averages 32.
This is not an issue for just Senators or teachers or school board members to be concerned about in debate. Much of the attention I have seen focused on this comes from parents who know their children are not getting academic assistance they need to do the best they can do.
There is a woman in New York whom I commend who started a grassroots parents organization called Class Size Matters. She began to form networks of parents around the country who know because they have seen with their own eyes and their experience of their children, that class size matters.
In Pennsylvania alone, this Class Size Matters network got 1,700 parents to sign a petition in just 2 days, urging the Senate to vote in favor of class size reductions.
I have heard from parents throughout New York who tell me in great detail how crowded their classrooms are and how they need help. This does not interfere with flexibility. This does not take anything away from the local school districts determining priorities, but it does give additional help and resources to those districts and those parents who know that unless we get those class sizes down, their children will not learn to the extent they should do so.
I also regret deeply that if we do not adopt this amendment, we will be stopping the progress we have made.
New York State has hired to date 2,600 teachers and has 700 more all ready to be hired. This will stop that hiring, and we know from the 2,600 we have already hired what a difference it makes in the classrooms of New York.
I believe that without dedicated funding for reducing class sizes, our hardest pressed, most needy districts will not receive the dollars they need to reduce the classes.
Mr. President, I urge my colleagues to stand behind our children, our parents, our teachers and reduce the size of our classes and adopt Senator Murray's amendment.
I yield back the remainder of my time.

Mr. President, I would like to recognize the accomplishments of James A. Harmon, the outgoing Chairman of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. When Chairman Harmon steps down from this position on May 25, he will have served Ex-Im Bank for 4 years, one of the longest terms as Chairman in the Bank's history.
Chairman Harmon came to Ex-Im Bank in 1997 after a distinguished 38-year career as an investment banker in New York. He brought his wealth of private sector experience to Washington and immediately set about the task of enhancing Ex-Im Bank's ability to achieve its important mission, supporting U.S. jobs through exports.
One of the early challenges he had to face was the global financial crisis that hit Asia and other emerging markets in 1997-98. Recognizing the important role Ex-Im Bank could play in this crisis, Chairman Harmon directed the Bank to extend much needed credit to many of the impacted Asian nations to keep trade flowing between this region and the United States. Perhaps the most dramatic example was in South Korea, where Ex-Im Bank provided $1 billion of short-term export credit insurance for South Korean banks that allowed South Korean businesses to purchase urgently needed raw materials and equipment from the United States. Ex-Im Bank supported more than 2,400 transactions in South Korea during this crucial period, compared to less than 60 the prior year. Ex-Im Bank also worked to shore up the struggling Asian markets by coordinating assistance for the region from the other major export credit agencies. Ex-Im Bank's aggressive response to the Asian financial crisis helped stabilize these economies and keep U.S. goods and services flowing to the region until commercial financing was once again available.
Under Chairman Harmon's leadership, Ex-Im Bank forged into new markets in an effort to increase opportunities for U.S. exporters. I am particularly pleased to cite the Bank's expanded involvement in Africa. During Chairman Harmon's tenure, Ex-Im Bank unveiled new programs for facilitating U.S. exports to sub-Saharan Africa and expanded the number of countries in this region for which financing support is available. Notably, Chairman Harmon demonstrated his personal commitment to sub-Saharan Africa by traveling to the region three times, becoming the first Ex-Im Bank Chairman to visit southern Africa. The results of these efforts have been dramatic. Ex-Im Bank support for transactions in sub-Saharan Africa rose from $50 million in 1998 to nearly $1 billion in 2000. I know from my own visits to sub-Saharan Africa the vital importance of increased U.S. trade with the region and I commend Chairman Harmon for his efforts.
Ex-Im Bank also enhanced its presence in Russia and the New Independent States, developing innovative financing structures that allowed U.S. exporters to capitalize on the vast opportunities of this market. In June 2000, Ex-Im Bank launched a Southeast Europe Initiative to develop U.S. trade opportunities in Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia and Romania, an initiative that can help foster the development of these emerging market economies as well as benefit U.S. exporters.
While working to support exports to new markets abroad, Chairman Harmon also pushed Ex-Im Bank to reach out to new groups of exporters here at home. During Chairman Harmon's tenure, Ex-Im Bank implemented program changes and marketing efforts aimed at expanding its support for women- and minority-owned businesses, two groups that have traditionally had difficulty accessing export financing. Chairman Harmon also made environmental exports a top priority, recognizing both the potential export opportunities for U.S. producers of environmental goods and services and the importance of promoting environmentally sound development. At the same time, Chairman Harmon championed the need for greater environmental responsibility in export financing, urging his G-7 and other major export credit agency counterparts to adopt uniform, meaningful environmental standards for the projects they finance.
Jim Harmon has worked tirelessly at Ex-Im Bank to create high-paying export-related jobs here at home by expanding opportunities for U.S. exporters abroad. I am pleased to welcome him back to New York after four years of distinguished service to Ex-Im Bank and the Nation. 

Is there objection to the modification of the amendment?
Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report the amendment.

Mr. President, I rise today in support of the bipartisan End of Racial Profiling Act of 2001. I believe it is a thoughtful and balanced effort, designed to bring people together, not to divide. I also want to express my sincere gratitude to my esteemed colleagues, Senator Feingold and Senator Corzine, for their leadership and tremendous efforts in crafting this legislation that affects so many communities throughout this country.
I also want to acknowledge the efforts of Representative Conyers, the Ranking Member of the House Judiciary Committee, and a leader on this issue. Representative Conyers has worked to obtain the support of both Democrats and Republicans alike, including Republican Representatives Asa Hutchinson, Chris Shays, Tim Johnson, Constance Morella, and Jim Greenwood. I thank them for attending the bipartisan press conference this morning and showing their support for this legislation. I hope we will be able to build upon this strong bipartisan support in the Senate.
I am also pleased that we were joined by Chief Bruce Chamberlin, an esteemed and experienced member of the national law enforcement community, who is the Chief of Police of Cheektowaga — in the western part of the great state of New York.
It was important for Chief Chamberlin to be here with us today to express his support for the bill because he recognizes, as we all do, that racial profiling is wrong and that this bill is an important step in bringing this practice to an end.
Racial profiling is unjust. It relegates honest, law-abiding citizens to second-class status when they suffer the embarrassment, the humiliation, the indignity, of being stopped or searched, and in some cases even physically harmed simply because of their race, ethnicity or national origin.
Racial profiling is not an effective law enforcement tool. The experts at John Jay College of Criminal Justice and elsewhere will tell you that the evidence is unquestionably clear, for example, that the vast majority of Blacks and Hispanics who are stopped or searched have committed no crime.
Indeed, racial profiling has an insidious and devastating effect on entire communities because it increases the level of mistrust between law enforcement and the communities it is charged with the heavy burden to protect. That result serves no one. It fails to serve law enforcement because a critical component of truly effective law enforcement is strong community-police relations, partnerships in which law enforcement and our communities are working together to reduce crime and to make our communities as safe as they can be.
Racial profiling fails to serve prosecutors, because law-abiding people who don't have faith that their law enforcement will protect them properly and treat them with dignity will not have faith in law enforcement when sitting on juries and assessing the credibility of police officers who often play a key role in getting convictions for criminals.
What does this bill do and what doesn't it do?
As you, my colleagues consider this legislation, understand that this bill is not about blaming law enforcement or saying that law enforcement is bad or doesn't do a good job. We know that this is simply not true.
Those who uphold our Nation's laws on the streets where we live are men and women of courage. They go to work each day without the same degree of certainty that most of us have that they will return home safely, because they never know when the next traffic stop, the next domestic dispute, the next arrest will explode in their face. There is a memorial here in Washington with the names of more than 14,000 American heroes who gave their lives to make ours a safer country.
What this bill does do is make very clear that racial profiling is wrong and that law enforcement agencies that haven't done so already should adopt policies and procedures to eliminate and prevent racial profiling.
Some might ask, how can adopting policies and procedures help stop racial profiling? Well, the experts at John Jay College will tell you that in the 1960s and early 1970s, most police departments in this country left it up to the individual officer to decide when to shoot to kill. During that time, the racial disparity among persons shot and killed by police was as high as eight African-Americans for every white person, and very much higher among victims who were neither armed nor in the process of assaulting a police officer. During the 1970s and early 1980s, police departments promulgated and enforced strict standards, basically decreeing that deadly force could be exercised only in defense of the life of the officer or another person. In the large police departments in this country, these changes were accompanied by reductions of as much as 51 percent in the number of civilians killed by police. It also resulted in the significant reduction in the number of officers killed in the line of duty. This is just one example of how good policies and procedures can actually save lives without reducing the effectiveness of law enforcement.
Recognizing the importance of policies and procedures to eliminate and prevent racial profiling, this bill provides incentives for law enforcement to promote such policies by providing grants to state and local law enforcement agencies to use in ways they believe will be most effective for their communities — whether to purchase equipment and other resources to assist in data collection or to provide training to officers to improve community relations and build trust.
Chief Chamberlin spoke eloquently this morning about the importance of training and building relationships between law enforcement and communities. His actions, however, have spoken even louder than his words. He has taken the lead in Western New York in forming the Law Enforcement and Diversity Team or "LEAD" program, which exists to enhance communication and understanding between suburban law enforcement agencies and the diverse citizenry of Western New York. The LEAD team, sponsored by the National Conference for Community and Justice and the Erie County Chiefs of Police, developed one of the Nation's leading programs--"Building Bridges" to start a dialogue between police officers and people of diverse cultural and racial backgrounds.
The U.S. Department of Transportation has utilized excerpts from the LEAD Team's "What to do When Stopped by Police" brochure for the department's national publication. The program has been adopted by the Buffalo and Cheektowaga school systems in the curriculum for high schools students. It provides an important educational opportunity for the entire community and assists in the development of positive relationships between police and community by eliminating some level of fear, distrust, and skepticism.
Other New Yorkers have also worked to improve the relationship between communities and law enforcement. New York's Attorney General, Elliot Spitzer, has instituted training programs in an effort to try and prevent racial profiling. In fact, just this past February through April, the Attorney General's office conducted in-service training of all members of the New Rochelle, New York Police Department at the request of that department. The training took place on Thursday mornings and focused, among other things, on what is meant by "racial profiling" and the perceptions of community members of police encounters in order to raise awareness. The training also reported on data collection efforts taking place across the country and the results of those efforts.
Academia can also play a role in promoting trust between law enforcement and the community. For example, the John Jay College of Criminal Justice — whose Master of Public Administration Program was ranked first in the nation among graduate schools with specializations in Criminal Justice Policy and Management by U.S. News and World Report for the second year in a row — has begun to conduct a six-week free course for members of the New York City Police Department on the racial and cultural diversity of New York City. More than 600 police officers from across New York City have enrolled in a course entitled: "Police Supervision in a Multiracial and Multicultural City."
With this bill, efforts like those currently led by Chief Chamberlain, Attorney General Spitzer, and John Jay College will be expanded throughout the country.
More than a year ago when I spoke about this issue at the Riverside Church in New York City, I said, "we must all be on the same side." I am so proud that today — we are all here together — on the same side, citizens, officers of the law, Republicans and Democrats — to say that racial profiling is wrong and must end.
We are here to say that in fighting racial profiling, we can at the same time forge even better relations between police and the neighborhoods they patrol, as we wage a common effort to reduce crime and make our communities safe.
 By Mr. SMITH of New Hampshire:
S. 990. A bill to amend the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act to improve the provisions relating to wildlife conservation and restoration programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
Mr. President, I rise today to introduce a comprehensive wildlife conservation measure, the American Wildlife Enhancement Act of 2001. This bill will help to increase conservation efforts by promoting local control and State partnerships through flexible, incentive driven conservation programs and increased partnerships with local land owners. The true conservationists are those who live on and work the land, and it is my intention to provide the incentives to help them continue those efforts. People don't come to New Hampshire for the malls. They come to kayak, bike, fish, swim, hunt, hike trails, ski, and more. That's our industry. We cannot, and should not, turn away from that. I believe that when we conserve our wildlife and wildlife areas, we affirm our long-standing tradition of honoring our natural American heritage. This bill is about achieving that goal in a cooperative, partnership approach, something that unfortunately, the Federal Government has too long neglected.
This bill will accomplish these goals by infusing additional funds into the popular Pittman-Robertson program; establishing a new competitive matching grant fund that would allow private landowners to apply for assistance to protect endangered and threatened species on their land; and establishing a new competitive grant fund that would allow one or several States to apply for a grant to protect an area of regional or national significance through the purchase of an easement or acquisition. This measure represents our best, and most effective, chances of addressing the growing needs for wildlife conservation in our Nation.
Title I of this bill authorizes $350 million a year to enhance the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration program. Unlike the existing Pittman-Robertson program, which is funded through a tax on hunting equipment, the enhanced program would be authorized for a specific time period, would have to compete for funds through the appropriations process and would be held in an account that is separate from the already established Wildlife Restoration Fund.
Funds for this enhanced program would be distributed to the States through a formula based on land area and population, with no State receiving less than one percent of the available funding. Projects eligible for funding through the new program would include: acquisition and improvement of wildlife habitat; hunter education; wildlife population surveys; construction of facilities to improve public access; management of wildlife areas; recreation; conservation education; and facility development and maintenance. States would pay for a project up front and would be reimbursed up to 75 percent of the total cost of the project. Similar language was included in last year's Commerce-State-Justice appropriations measure, but was authorized for one year, at a level of $50 million. The program has been successful since its inception, and should continue past this fiscal year. My bill would authorize this program for five years at a level of $350 million each year.
The State of New Hampshire ranks 44th out of 50 States in land area and 41st in population. Still, the State received $487,000 out of the money appropriated in last year's Commerce-State-Justice appropriations bill. If my bill were enacted and fully appropriated, even a small State like New Hampshire would be eligible to receive $3.5 million. Believe me, $3.5 million would make an incredible difference not only for New Hampshire, but nationwide. There is not only a demonstrated need for these additional funds, but a keen interest in seeing this infusion of appropriations within a time-tested program, the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Program, popular with sportsmen and women and conservationists alike.
The second title of my bill establishes a new competitive matching grant fund that would allow private landowners to apply for assistance to protect endangered and threatened species on their land through the development and implementation of recovery agreements. A recovery agreement would provide an economic incentive to protect habitat for threatened and endangered species, list specific recovery goals, schedule an implementation plan, and monitor the results. In return for agreeing to carry out these activities, the landowner would receive financial compensation. Currently any effort that a private landowner undertakes to conserve an endangered species is paid for out-of-pocket. Under this bill though, for the first time, private landowners will be able to apply for a grant to assist in the recovery of endangered or threatened species on their property. In other words, they would be eligible to get compensation for some of the conservation measures that they now have to pay for themselves.
That is a big step forward. Since approximately 90-percent of the listed endangered and threatened species inhabit non-federal lands, one of the keys to the successful recovery of our endangered and threatened species is the increased participation of private landowners. This is best achieved through a collaborative, not combative, process that provides landowners with an incentive to participate.
This title is an amendment to the Endangered Species Act. This title should not be interpreted as a vehicle for comprehensive reform, but as a great opportunity to get dollars to those land owners who want to protect species today. I welcome the opportunity to work with all of my colleagues on comprehensive reform to the Endangered Species Act through hearings, debate and bipartisan legislation. However, in the meantime we need to provide private land owners the opportunity to protect the habitat of endangered species.
The final title of my bill would establish a new competitive grant fund that would allow one or more States to apply for a grant to protect an area of regional or national significance through the purchase of an easement or acquisition. Without a source of flexible Federal funds such as this, States and local communities alone will be unable to protect some of the Nation's most important natural areas. I highlight the Northern Forest that spans the states of New Hampshire, Maine, Vermont, and New York; the Central Appalachian Highlands; the Mississippi Delta, just to name a few. This flexible funding will allow States and communities to protect vital natural, cultural and recreational areas without creating or expanding Federal units. Such a funding program promotes local control and multi-state partnerships, and is also cost-effective.
I am a firm believer in preserving our national treasures for future generations to enjoy. I also believe that the States, local communities and individual property owners are in the best position to identify and protect the species and areas that are in the greatest need of conservation. But they also need financial assistance from the Federal Government to effectively conserve and manage the natural resources that need either protection or restoration. This belief is strongly reflected in my bill.
I have received a very positive response for this bill from the interested constituencies, both in New Hampshire and nationwide. In general, there is a growing consensus that we must act now or we will lose many of our special places, and if we wait, what is destroyed or lost will be gone forever. It is our responsibility to act as stewards of the environment. I have said it before and I will say it again: it is not anti-conservative to be pro-environment.
This bill is one that should attract the interest of both sides of the aisle. On that note, I would like to thank Senator Reid, my counterpart on the Environment and Public Works Committee, for his leadership on the issue of wildlife conservation. In April, he chaired a field hearing in Reno, NV, on State wildlife and conservation issues. I know he is engaged in this matter, and I look forward to working with him to advance the goals of the American Wildlife Enhancement Act.
I encourage my colleagues to support the American Wildlife Enhancement Act of 2001 and ask that the text of the bill be printed in the Record.
 There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the "American Wildlife Enhancement Act of 2001". (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the "American Wildlife Enhancement Act of 2001". (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows:Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
This title may be cited as the "Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Programs Improvement Act".
(a) In General.--Section 2 of the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669a) is amended to read as follows:
(a) In General.--Section 3 of the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669b) is amended-- (1) by striking "Sec. 3. (a)(1) An" and inserting the following:
Section 4 of the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669c) is amended by striking the second subsection (c) and subsection (d) and inserting the following: "(d) Apportionment of Amounts in the Account.-- "(1) Deduction for administrative expenses.--For each fiscal year, the Secretary may deduct, for payment of administrative expenses incurred by the Secretary in carrying out activities funded from the Account, not more than 3 percent of the total amount of the Account available for apportionment for the fiscal year. "(2) Apportionment to district of columbia and territories.--For each fiscal year, after making the deduction under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall apportion from the amount in the Account remaining available for apportionment-- "(A) to each of the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a sum equal to not more than \1/ 2\ of 1 percent of that remaining amount; and "(B) to each of Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands, a sum equal to not more than \1/4\ of 1 percent of that remaining amount. "(3) Apportionment to states.-- "(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), for each fiscal year, after making the deduction under paragraph (1) and the apportionment under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall apportion the amount in the Account remaining available for apportionment among States in the following manner: "(i) \1/3\ based on the ratio that the area of each State bears to the total area of all States. "(ii) \2/3\ based on the ratio that the population of each State bears to the total population of all States. "(B) Minimum and maximum apportionments.--For each fiscal year, the amounts apportioned under this paragraph shall be adjusted proportionately so that no State is apportioned a sum that is-- "(i) less than 1 percent of the amount available for apportionment under this paragraph for the fiscal year; or "(ii) more than 5 percent of that amount. "(4) Use.-- "(A) In general.--Apportionments under paragraphs (2) and (3)-- "(i) shall supplement, but not supplant, funds available to States, the District of Columbia, and territories--
(a) In General.--The Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 12 and 13 (16 U.S.C. 669i, 669 note) as sections 13 and 15, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 11 (16 U.S.C. 669h-2) the following:
(a) Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act.--The Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (as amended by section 105(a)(1)) is amended by inserting after section 13 the following: "SEC. 14. NONAPPLICABILITY OF FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT.
(a) The first section of the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669) is amended by striking "That the" and inserting the following:
"The". (b) Section 5 of the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669d) is amended by striking "Sec. 5." and inserting the following:
This title takes effect on October 1, 2001.
The purpose of this title is to promote involvement by non- Federal entities in the recovery of the endangered species and threatened species of the United States and the habitats on which the species depend.
(a) In General.--Section 13 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (87 Stat. 902) is amended to read as follows:
(a) In General.--The Partnerships for Wildlife Act (16 U.S.C. 3741 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

Madam President, I commend and thank my good friend, the Senator from California, for her usual eloquence and energy in putting forth a very commonsense proposal, which is that we ought to do everything in our power to make sure our public schools work before turning our backs on them. I especially note her telling all of us that voters in California and Michigan, who have been given the chance to vote on vouchers in their own States, have not only rejected that proposal but have done so overwhelmingly.
I join my friend from California, and so many others, in opposing the Gregg amendment which would provide $50 million for a voucher demonstration program. I think it is fair to ask: Why would I and others oppose a mere experiment?
What I would like to do is just reflect back for a minute on an experience I had which really crystallized my opposition for me.
A few years ago I was in Northern Ireland, in Belfast, where I was privileged to meet with a number of people who were crossing sectarian lines to try to come together to find a way to peacefully coexist after decades and decades of troubles between Protestant and Catholic citizens. I was so struck, after a daylong conference — where we spoke about how to set up a governing assembly, how to provide economic opportunity, how we could get more people involved in the participation required for a democracy to work — when several people said: But the real problem we face is in our schools.
I said: What do you mean?
A number of them went on to tell me that from the very earliest of ages children from the two religious traditions grew up in very separate environments. There are literally barriers between Catholic and Protestant neighborhoods, and then they go to schools that are run by the respective churches into which they are born.
Person after person said to me: We will never live and work in peace if we don't go to school together. We won't have a chance to get to know one another. Can't you help us have a public school system like you have in America?
That made such an impression on me because I have been fortunate to travel all over the world. I have been in many countries on every continent except Antarctica. In every country I go to, I meet very smart people. I meet athletic stars, Olympic gold medal winners. I meet scientists, very successful business leaders, and great artists. Yet there is something very different about every other society than ours because no other society has committed itself to the proposition that all people have the opportunity to live up to their God-given potential and that we will provide universal public education, to offer that to each young boy and girl.
We are not perfect. We know that. We know we have schools that fail at this responsibility. Yet the goal we have set and the results we have seen, from a commitment to public education for so many years now, have been realized in the success of this country, in the uniqueness of our mobility, and in the opportunities we make available.
There are some children who, frankly, start out pretty far behind the starting line. They do not have the family background. They do not have the environmental enrichment. They do not have families who will help them succeed in school. They are often trapped in generational poverty. When you have poor people, you often have poor services. It is a challenge to those of us who believe in public education to come up with reasons to oppose something that sounds so good. You can read the supporters' comments. They say: In some of our large cities, children are trapped in failing schools. They should be set free. And we should, therefore, give them money to go to a private or parochial school. And it sounds so good. But it has a number of serious flaws that I hope will lead a majority in this Chamber to vote against it.
Let's take, first, the fact that the experiments that have been run — because we have already run experiments on vouchers — have demonstrated absolutely no evidence that vouchers help to improve student achievement.
Secondly, we know vouchers do not help the students who need the help the most.
Thirdly, vouchers do nothing to help improve public schools. In fact, research shows clearly that vouchers only further segregate and stratify our public schools.
That does not stop the proponents. I often have remarked since I have been in Washington that Washington operates in an evidence-free zone. You can put out the evidence, and if it runs counter to the ideology, then the evidence does not count.
But clearly there is no evidence. In fact, a 1998 study of the Milwaukee public school choice program, done by Cecilia Rouse of Princeton University, found that students in public schools with smaller class size and additional State funding experienced significantly faster reading scoring gains than students who attended private schools through the program.
In Cleveland, a study of the voucher program found no significant difference between the achievement of voucher students and their public school counterparts in reading, mathematics, social studies — the full battery of tests — after controlling for background characteristics, including prior achievement.
So I do not think we need another experiment to tell us vouchers do not work. We already have clear evidence of that fact.
But there are those who argue that increasing competition among public schools, through vouchers, will help improve student achievement in failing schools. But we know that, too, is a false promise.
We know what does work — strong accountability, coupled with the extra attention that students who need it require, and the kinds of intervention we have heard about — everything from preschool to parental involvement to afterschool and summer school.
Scholars from the Economic Policy Institute, Duke University, and the Charles A. Dana Center at the University of Texas, as well as Stanford University, have found that States with strong accountability systems which do not include vouchers were successful in improving student achievement in the lowest performing public schools. Researchers call it the scarlet-letter effect, which shows that if a school is termed "failing," the school is often motivated to improve. That is what we should be focusing on now, and that is what we are focusing on in this education debate.
I also worry that trying to provide sufficient funds to afford a student a choice that is meaningful will siphon much needed funds out of our public school system. A $1,500 voucher, for example, is just not sufficient in most large cities I am aware of, and we, therefore, know that families have to add a substantial contribution themselves. In Milwaukee, for example, as many as 46 percent of students dropped out of the voucher program in the first year, and 28 percent dropped out in the fifth year because the $3,600 voucher was not sufficient to cover costs such as registration fees, books, uniforms, and transportation.
We also have to worry that if you implement vouchers, then very often the motivated students and their parents will take advantage of them and we will see the kind of exodus from the public schools that will only make it more difficult to change their futures.
How can we justify taking $50 million away from proven practices of improving student achievement? We need to do more to lower class sizes. Yet we were unsuccessful in continuing a proven program to do just that by helping to fund teachers in the classroom. Our friends on the other side said: That is not something the Federal Government should be doing; so even though we know it works, we won't vote for it.
We were unsuccessful in having construction and modernization and repair funding available where we know that so many schools, particularly the very schools we are talking about, are literally falling down around the heads of students and teachers. We were told: Well, modernizing our schools is not a Federal responsibility.
We need to recruit and retain teachers, and we know we are not going to do that if we don't provide competitive salaries and bonuses and other financial rewards. And we have a long way to go before we have the teaching core, the quality teaching core we need in our country. Instead of investing in proven measures to raise student achievement, we are being asked to divert and siphon off these dollars.
I started by saying that my concern is not only based on the fact there isn't any evidence this works, that it siphons money out of the public schools, that, in effect, it opens the door to giving up on what we know makes a difference in our children's lives, but that also public schools, for me, are the distinguishing characteristic that sets us apart from many other societies. They are the bedrock of our democracy. I don't think we would be giving up on any of our fundamental freedoms so easily. I don't think we would be turning our back on our Constitution or our Bill of Rights. Yet without a strong public school system, we could, in effect, be doing just that.
At a time when we are trying to hold students and teachers to higher standards, diverting scarce resources to fund an experiment that we already know has weak results and could very well undermine the future of public education, which takes care of 95 percent of our students and works well in most parts of our country, is a very tragic step in the wrong direction.
I heard the end of the remarks of my colleague from California. I know she is a very strong supporter of public education, as I am. And like her, I went to public schools from kindergarten through high school. I believe in public schools. I was struck by what she said. If we were already doing what we know works, if we had lowered class sizes, if we had imposed the discipline, if we had recruited and paid teachers in the hard-to-teach schools what they should be paid, if we had modernized our schools so we didn't have chunks of plaster falling on teachers' heads, as recently happened in a school in my State, then if we still didn't have results, maybe even we very strong public school advocates would be willing to say: Well, we need to try something. But we are nowhere near there.
We have turned our backs on the children who need us the most. We have basically left them in the most poorly funded schools with the least qualified teachers, often not even encountering a certified teacher without adequate resources, without being held accountable, and we say: Well, what do you know; it is failure.
This is similar to so many of the other proposals that would undermine public education. It is aimed not at solving the problem but at coming up with a short-term, ideologically driven answer to a complicated set of issues. It is tragic that when we know what works, we are unwilling to step up and fund the resources that will give every child in America, no matter who that child's parents might be, the same chance I was given.
I urge my colleagues to oppose this amendment. I yield back the remainder of my time.

Mr. President, I rise today in opposition to both Senator Sessions' and Senator Harkin's amendments, which attempt to reach the goal of helping school districts establish and implement discipline policies that are consistent for every child in the school district.
I strongly believe that we do need to come to a resolution in Federal law that will help school districts appropriately discipline students when they act out violently or in a way that disrupts the learning of other students, but that we should be certain that our actions do not punish children for their disabilities.
The problem we have, at hand, is that the 1997 IDEA reauthorization, as passed and implemented, has developed a separate discipline policy for children in special education, which many school superintendents have found unequal and unfair in their efforts to maintain discipline in their schools. In fact, a recent GAO report, published in January of this year, found that while many principals believe that the differing school policies had a neutral effect on their schools, 27 percent of principals did believe that a separate discipline policy for special education students is unfair to the regular student population.
Now, I want to be very clear that my intention is not to go back to the pre-1975 days when students with disabilities were segregated from the regular student population or, even worse, were denied education all together. In fact, in the early 1970s, I walked door to door trying to figure out why so many children were staying home from school. The census, at the time, showed that there were 2 million children out of school so the Children's Defense Fund worked to answer the question of why these children were not in school. While working for the Children's Defense Fund, I was one of the researchers who found that approximately 750,000 of these children were being kept out of school because they were handicapped. This research led to the first-ever report by the Children's Defense Fund, "Children out of School in America," which helped provide solid research to pass the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975.
As the Progressive Policy Institute so eloquently concluded in a recent report, thanks to this law "today many disabled children in America have the opportunity to obtain high-quality educational experience tailored to their needs and circumstances, the priorities of their parents, and the judgements of their teachers." This report goes on, however, to point out that the law has not kept up with the challenges faced by today's schools. Discipline is a primary example. While IDEA provides protection for disabled students, many believe it goes too far. That, while protecting disabled students, the law may unintentionally harm the educational progress of other students in the classroom.
Senator Sessions' amendment attempts to fix this problem by eliminating all due process for children with disabilities who have disciplinary problems. Senator Harkin's amendment, on the other hand, attempts to address the problem by encouraging local school districts to implement uniform discipline policies while, at the same time, recodifying current IDEA law as it relates to the discipline policy.
I oppose these amendments because I do not believe that either amendment adequately addresses the problem of working toward a uniform discipline policy that allows school administrators to maintain discipline so that all children are offered the opportunity to learn and are not interrupted due to the actions of one child, while protecting the civil rights of children with disabilities to receive a free and appropriate education.
There is much work we need to do on this issue and I believe that we should develop balanced policies that can be part of the discussion and debate during the 2002 reauthorization of IDEA. We need to look for policies that help prevent children with discipline problems from unnecessarily being identified as in need of special education. We need to ensure that quality alternative educational settings are developed for those students who need alternative placements. And, most importantly, we need to fully fund IDEA so that children with disabilities receive appropriate treatment.

Madam President, if I could have 2 minutes to associate myself completely with the majority leader's eloquent statement, I rise in opposition to this amendment for all of the reasons that the majority leader has just outlined; but also, further, to say I was honored to serve for 8 years as the Honorary Chair of the Girl Scouts of America. I know the value of the Girl Scouts and the Boy Scouts.
To deprive any youngster of the opportunity to participate over this issue strikes me as regrettable at the very least.
The Girl Scouts don't discriminate. We have had an organization that has gone for so many years without any of this difficulty. It should be up to the local level to determine whether or not a local school district wishes to have the Boy Scouts offer these services to youngsters in their schools and in their districts.
I am absolutely amazed that my friends on the other side would propose an amendment that so totally eviscerates local control. It is already unnecessary, as we know, with respect to the use of facilities. The Supreme Court has already, as it did again yesterday, reaffirmed access to public school facilities.
If we are saying that having the Boy Scouts either in its present form or with slight modifications determined by the local parents and the schools would in any way jeopardize all Federal funding, it just absolutely amazes me that people on the other side could make such an argument.
So I believe, with all my heart, that we should not be discriminating against anyone in our country. But certainly a local district that tries to work out whatever its problems are with the Boy Scouts, and makes a decision that it considers in the best interests of its children, should not face the peril of losing all Federal funding that should be made available to educate our children, which is what we have been debating now for more than a month.
So I hope all of us will join in rejecting this amendment and making clear that we respect the Boy Scouts, we respect the Girl Scouts, and we especially respect local control over educational facilities and opportunities.
Thank you, Madam President.

Mr. President, I only caught the tail end of the remarks by the Senator from Texas. But I will just point out that this bill, which we are hoping to consider today, has been in the works for years. It has gone through a number of drafts; it has been voted on in previous incarnations. It is not a new issue. It is ready for the full debate and disposition in the Senate. It is not like a budget bill that is presented without any debate and without any adequate preparation, as we experienced a few months ago. This is an issue that is more than ripe for the consideration of this body.
I thank Senator Daschle for making the McCain-Edwards-Kennedy Patients' Bill of Rights the first bill he has brought to the floor as our Senate majority leader.
I really rise today on behalf of the countless New Yorkers, and really millions of Americans across our country, who have been waiting for this day for a very long time. I heard some remarks by the Senator from Texas about the efforts that were made, I guess, 6, 7 years ago now, to try to provide health care coverage to every single American. I was deeply involved in those efforts, and although we were not successful, the goal was one that I think we should still keep at the forefront of our minds and hearts because when we began our work in 1993, there were approximately 33 million Americans without insurance; today we are up to 42 million. This is after the so-called managed care/HMO revolution occurred, where people have been finding it harder to afford coverage, afford the deductibles, afford the copayments, with the result that we have more people uninsured today than when many of us tried to address this problem some years ago.
There are many urgent health care issues before us as a nation such as sky high prescription drugs for our seniors, too many without adequate coverage, and once they have Medicare they can't afford the additional coverage that is required in order to give them the kind of health care they should have. There are gaps in our health safety net, a shortage of nurses in our hospitals and nursing homes, and the very difficult conditions under which so many of our nurses now labor. And, of course, there is the growing crisis of the uninsured. So we have our work cut out for us in order to deliver on the promise of quality, affordable, accessible health care for all Americans.
That is why I am urging we proceed without further delay or obfuscation and pass a Patients' Bill of Rights — the bipartisan Patients' Bill of Rights that Senators McCain, Edwards, and Kennedy have worked so hard to present, which has bipartisan support in the House.
We have to finish this job. We have been laboring over it since 1996, in earnest with the efforts within both Houses of Congress since 1997. We have now been waiting and waiting for the Congress to act. Now is the time.
I believe we should act not because it has been on the agenda for a long time, although it has, and not because it is one of those issues to which finally the stars seemed aligned and with the Democratic majority now in charge of the Senate we can actually get it to the floor but because of the patients and their families who are out there waiting and literally praying for us to act.
Each of the patients I have met and heard from, and each of the families whom all of us have heard from, tell a story that describes an urgent situation needing timely and responsive care. That is why this bill is so important.
It is about getting the care you need when you need it. It is about getting care in a timely manner from doctors you trust and choose. It is about having doctors and nurses in charge of your health care, not accountants and bookkeepers.
My colleague, Tom Harkin from Iowa, had a memorable phrase today at the press conference. He said, "The American people don't want their doctors doing their taxes and they don't want their accountants providing their health care."
Each of us should be able to look to our doctors, our nurses, our health care professionals for the care that we trust and need. This is about access to an emergency room when we need it.
I recall being in Ithaca, NY, about 2 years ago and meeting a young woman who came to see me with a stack of medical records, literally a foot high, just desperate. She had been in a very dangerous, nearly fatal accident on one of those winding roads that go through that beautiful part of New York. Some of you may have traveled through Ithaca or may have gone to Cornell. You know what beautiful country it is, but it has also a lot of winding roads. She was in a devastating accident, lying unconscious on the side of the road. Luckily, someone came upon her and called for aid and they were able to medivac her out with a helicopter, save her life, and she was in hospital care and rehab for nearly a year. She gets out and what does she find? She gets a bill from her HMO for the helicopter medivac emergency service because — get this — she didn't call for permission first. She is unconscious on the side of the road and they want to charge her $10,000 because she didn't call for permission.
So this is about getting the emergency care you need when you need it. It is about seeing a specialist when you need it, when your doctor says: I have gone as far as I can go; you need to go see a specialist. It is about women being able to designate their OB/GYN as their specialist, and about mothers and fathers being able to designate their pediatrician as their child's general practitioner as well. It is about all of these and more — the kinds of issues that are not just written somewhere in a headline but are lived with day in and day out, which are talked about around the kitchen table, around the water cooler — the life-and-death issues that really make a vital difference to families all over New York and America — families such as that of Susan Nealy, from the Bronx, whose husband had a serious heart condition but whose referral to a cardiologist was delayed a month. The day before the appointment was finally scheduled, Mr. Nealy died of a massive heart attack, leaving behind his widow and two young children, ages 5 and 3.
It is like the family of the 15-year-old boy from New York who developed complications from heart disease, but his health plan refused to allow him to see an out-of-network specialist familiar with the case and instead sent the teenager to a network provider who did not see him for 4 months, and then the boy's lungs were filling with blood, and 2 days later he collapsed in the street and died.
These are just two of the stories I could pick from my innumerable conversations and letters that I have received. There are so many more we could tell.
For every one of these stories, there are untold stories of families whose struggles for the care they needed were denied or delayed. According to patient reports, health plans delay needed care for 35,000 patients every day. In fact, delayed care and payment is a business practice that health plans have perfected.
I have heard from many doctors who tell me that each day a health plan withholds payments represents literally thousands of dollars in interest that a health plan could earn. The practice of delay is so widespread that there is a term for it. It is called "living off the float." Unfortunately, not everyone who is subject to it actually ends up living.
Look, I don't blame the accountants and the bookkeepers. They are trying to maximize their shareholders' return, their profits. That is the business they are in. But this cannot go on. There have to be rules that say you must, regardless of your being in business and regardless of having to make quarterly returns, put patients, doctors, and nurses first.
The physicians and nurses I speak with are so frustrated about this. They are caught between the sharp conflict, between business practices that I personally think are unscrupulous, but nevertheless they are engaged in, and the principles of the oaths that they take to do no harm, to get the health care to the patient when the patient needs it when it can do some good. Life-or-death situations rarely wait for prior authorization.
Last summer, I met Dr. Thomas Lee, a neurosurgeon at the Northern Westchester Hospital Center, just up the road from where we live in Chappaqua. Dr. Lee was called to the emergency room one day about a year ago because a patient — not his patient; it was someone he had never seen before — a young woman in her early thirties collapsed at work. She was brought to the emergency room.
Dr. Lee did his neurosurgical analysis, did the tests that were necessary, and discovered this young woman had a very serious tumor that was pressing on vital parts of her brain and needed to be operated on.
They found her husband, thankfully, and they called the HMO that insured the family and asked for permission to perform the surgery right then. Dr. Lee said it was, if not a matter of life and death, a matter of paralysis and normal life, and they were denied. They were told that because Dr. Lee was not one of their network physicians, because the Northern Westchester Hospital Center was not the hospital center they preferred to use, he could not do the surgery.
For 3 hours, Dr. Lee, his nurse, and the hospital staff were engaged in an argument with the HMO instead of performing the lifesaving surgery. It breaks one's heart to think about this neurosurgeon who could be saving lives getting on the phone trying to get permission to do what he is trained to do.
Finally, he was so fed up, he said: Look, this young woman's life is at stake. I will perform the surgery free of charge so long as you will cover the hospitalization. With that deal struck, the HMO let him proceed.
I am very proud Dr. Lee is practicing medicine in my neck of the woods, but I do not expect doctors and neurosurgeons to perform lifesaving heroic surgery for free. That is not the way the system is supposed to work. These are people who go to school for decades to do this work, and they deserve the respect and compensation we should be putting into our health care system, not to satisfy HMOs but to pay for the services of trained physicians and health care professionals.
For the past 5 years patient advocates have worked on this bill, and we have seen every delaying tactic one can imagine. I had a front seat to this when I was down at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue. We were working very hard to get this bill through the Congress. Every excuse one can come up with was thrown in the way. It became so frustrating to all of us who knew that lives were at stake, care was being denied and delayed; that passage of needed protections was being derailed.
We come to this day. Luckily for us, we are here not only because it is the right thing to do but because States and courts have realized they just cannot wait any longer. They have seen firsthand what is going on in our country.
New York passed a State managed care protection bill in 1996; they even passed a law in 1998 to strengthen the protections — all before the Congress chose to act. Many more States have passed such protections, including Texas, specifically aimed to permit injured patients to hold their health plans accountable for their injuries.
President Clinton signed an Executive order giving 85 million Americans with federally sponsored health care, such as Medicare and Medicaid, protections similar to what we are trying to give to all Americans through a 1998 act.
Even Federal courts, notably in the case of Andrews-Clarke v. Travelers Insurance, have urged the Congress to act. In that case, Judge William Young states:
Although the alleged conduct of Travelers and Greenspring in this case is extraordinarily troubling, even more disturbing to the Court is the failure of Congress to amend a statute . . . that has come conspicuously awry from its original intent.
Yet because of our failure to enact such a statute, at least 43 percent of all Americans with employer-sponsored private coverage are still left out in the cold. These Americans cannot afford to wait any longer. Forty percent of Americans know that passing a law today is even more urgent than it was 2 years ago, and a majority of them thought it was urgent then.
Let's work in a bipartisan way. This bill is bipartisan. Senator McCain, Senator Edwards, and Senator Kennedy have all worked to get to this point. They have all made compromises. Their bill is the only bill before the Senate that applies to all 190 million Americans with private health coverage. It is the only bill before the Senate that has all the protections of Medicare and Medicaid. It is the only bill that has the support of over 500 consumer and provider advocates.
Anybody who knows anything about some of these provider groups, such as the American Medical Association, knows that Congress is not their preferred venue. They are not keen on having the Congress tell them to do or not do anything, but doctors are so frustrated that even the American Medical Association has come time and again asking that this bill be passed.
It is the only bill that guarantees coverage for the routine costs of FDA-approved clinical trials which are so important to patients with cancer and so important particularly to children with cancer.
This is the only bill that guarantees an internal and external review as soon as it is medically necessary.
In sum, this is the only bill before the Senate that protects patients, not HMOs.
Just as delaying tactics by managed care organizations have injured and even killed millions of Americans over time, delaying tactics by the opponents of this bill have taken their toll.
I want my colleagues to look at this patient survey that is behind me. Each day, 35,000 patients have a specialty referral delayed or denied; 18,000 every day are forced to change medications as a result of their health plan's determinations — not their doctors but their health plans. When I say "health plans," I mean somebody sitting in an office, usually hundreds of miles from where the patient or doctor is, second-guessing the doctor, saying; I am sorry, your doctor may have 30, 40 years of practice and experience, but I am going to sit in this office without ever having seen you and decide that I can second-guess what kind of prescription medication you should have.
Forty-one thousand patients a day experience a worsening of their condition because of actions by their HMOs.
One can go through this list and see what patients are saying. Then one can look at another list that comes from surveys of doctors, those who are on the front lines. They are saying they believe their patients are confronting serious declines in their health from plan abuse. This is the kind of information that concerns me because when I go to the doctor, I expect my doctor to take care of me. He or she has sworn an oath, they have been well trained, and I have checked them out. I feel like I am putting myself in someone's hands whom I can trust, and doctors are saying they are not being permitted to practice medicine. They are being told they have to subject their decisions to people they have never met nor seen.
It is because of the desire of HMOs to slow down payment, to deny payment, to keep that float I talked about going, basically to use the money they should be paying to doctors and hospitals for taking care of us for their own purposes, for their own profits, for their bottom lines.
In my office I keep a picture of a young, beautiful woman named Donna Munnings. This is Donna. This is a young woman who reminds me every single day when I look up at her picture in my office of what can happen when the system does not respond until it is too late. Donna's mother Mary is a school bus driver from Scottsville, NY. She has been lobbying and advocating for this bill for years. Her daughter Donna died February 8, 1997, after having visited her primary care physician repeatedly, only to be told that she had an upper respiratory infection and suffered from panic attacks and that no diagnostic tests were necessary. Had the doctors performed a $750 lung scan in time, they would have seen not an upper respiratory infection but a football-sized blood clot in her lung.
Her mother Mary said:
In my subsequent research I found that HMOs can and do penalize doctors for ordering tests which HMOs feel are unnecessary. But all for the sake of money [all for the sake of a $750 test] we lost a vital, beautiful young lady who had only begun her life.
We are going to hear a lot of debate. In fact, we are debating whether we can even proceed with this bill: Yet more delaying tactics, yet more efforts to obstruct the kind of care that every one of us needs. I can guarantee the people out in that lobby and the people in the offices they represent, they would not stand for not getting the care their child needs. If they had a daughter who was suffering day after day after day, and the doctors could not tell her what was wrong and they kept sending her home, I can guarantee that those executives and those lobbyists would get some other source of care for their daughter.
But Mary is a school bus driver. She didn't know where else to turn. Having insurance was a pretty big deal. They didn't know what else to do, other than just keep going back, as Donna's condition got worse and worse and worse.
Patients buy health insurance in order to feel assured that when they seek care under the benefits for which they have paid, that care will be available and it will be available in time to be effective. Yet we know that that does not happen. In one State, the State of New York, according to Department of Insurance statistics, of the nearly 18,000 HMO decisions challenged on appeal, over 10,000 were reversed. This means that when patients can test their HMO's decision to deny needed care, over half the time the patients are right.
Yet, through a loophole in Federal law, there are too many consumers in New York — over 2.25 million — who still are not protected against these incorrect and dangerous decisions. They have no recourse. There is nothing they can do because we have not given them a Patients' Bill of Rights. They need a Federal law to give them the parity and protection their neighbors and coworkers have.

Indeed, the Senator from New York does recall that. I appreciate the Senator from Illinois raising that because that, of course, is one of the objections the opponents are trying to throw up, that this bill will open the floodgates for lawsuits. In Texas that has not happened. It has not happened anywhere in the country where these protections have been afforded under State law.
People are not rushing to the courthouse. They want the care that they need. They don't want a lawyer; they want a doctor; and they want the doctor to take care of them according to the doctor's best judgment. That is what doctors are telling us. They are not being permitted to do that.
I appreciate my friend from Illinois raising that point because, as this debate proceeds, you are going to hear a lot of arguments about why we just cannot do this. You know, we just cannot take care of Donna and her mother Mary and all the other Donnas and Marys in our country. There will be all sorts of red herrings and all kinds of arguments made that just do not hold water. There is no basis in fact for them, but they sound good. Maybe they will scare some people. But we are tired of being scared and intimidated. This is no longer just a political issue, this goes to the very heart of who we are as Americans.
Are we going to take care of each other? Are we going to let doctors and nurses practice their professions? Or are we going to turn our lives over to HMO accountants and bookkeepers and the like?
I am hoping we will not only proceed to this bill, which deserves a full hearing, deserves a full debate, and deserves a unanimous vote in this Chamber. I hope when we pass this, we will be sending a very clear message to all the mothers and fathers and family members that this will never happen again. This beautiful young woman whose life was cut short tragically would still be with us today if that HMO had just said: maybe we should let you go ahead and have that test.
I look forward to working with my colleagues. This has been 5 years in the making. Let's end the politics of delay and move forward with the motion to proceed.

Mr. President, last week, the administration made headlines when it said it would stop the bombing in Vieques.
But is that really true? Let's look at the fine print.
First, the administration did not commit to stopping the bombing immediately and permanently, as so many of us have called for. In fact, the bombing runs continue this week.
Second, the administration said it would stop the bombing by May 1, 2003. But is that really something new? Let's look at the date by which the bombing would stop under the current agreement and existing law, which provides for an end to the bombing if the people vote for it. The current agreement and existing law call for an end to the bombing by May 1, 2003 — the very same date.
In other words, the administration is saying nothing more than what current law mandates if the people of Vieques vote to stop the bombing.
If that is all the administration announced — that the bombing would stop by the same date provided for under current law — then this flurry of attention would be little more than an overblown story about this President's desire to abide by the letter and spirit of the agreement entered into between the Federal Government and the representatives of the people of Vieques and Puerto Rico.
But that is not all the administration announced. It also announced that it wanted to stop the November referendum. The devil is in the details, they say. Well, this is one powerful devil of an idea that has not received the scrutiny it deserves.
For what the administration is really attempting to do is to undermine the intent of the law and subvert the will of the people of Vieques.
The administration says that a referendum is unnecessary, because it already plans to end the bombing by 2003. I say a referendum is more important than ever, because without an electoral mandate to require an end to the bombing, any administration expression of intent is nothing more than that: an expression of intent. Not a legal requirement. And "intentions" can change at a moment's notice.
I wholeheartedly support all efforts to find a viable alternative site to train our naval forces. We need such training, to protect our national interest and to protect our troops. And we must work hard to find places and ways to provide such a vital element of our defense.
As I have said before, the people of Puerto Rico are great patriots; its sons and daughters volunteer for our Nation's armed forces at one of the highest rates in our country.
Thousands of Puerto Ricans have lost their lives in service of their country during all the wars of the 20th century. We need the good training to protect all our troops, many of whom are Puerto Rican.
So this is not a matter in which the people of Vieques or Puerto Rico should be pitted against the interests of national security. We are all Americans. We are all on the same team and we want the same thing: the best trained armed forces in the world.
And so, I agree with President Bush when he says the "Navy will find another place to practice." I agree with Secretary Powell when he says, "Let's find alternative ways of making sure that our troops are ready . . . using technology, using simulators and also finding a place to conduct live fire."
But here's the bottom line: Under current law, if the people of Vieques vote in November to end the bombing by May 1, 2003, the bombing must end by that date. Pure and simple. However, under the administration's plan, there will be no referendum. And therefore, there will be no mandate and no requirement to end the bombing by 2003. Only a policy to do so. And that policy could be altered by the President anytime between now and 2003.
In fact, Secretary Rumsfeld has already said that the Navy might stay on Vieques for another, and I quote, "two, three, four years" until it can arrange "the training that's needed in other ways." Defense Department officials were also quick to point out that while the President said that the Navy would find another place to practice within "a reasonable period of time" he never defined "reasonable."
Secretary England said he wanted to "have us control our destiny," meaning the Navy, as opposed to allowing what he called "this level of emotion" distract "our attention from the real issue."
In other words, the will of the people of Vieques is an "emotion" that must be put aside, and the people of Vieques should not control their destiny — the Navy should.
I believe that is the wrong way to deal with this very important issue. I believe we should work toward a solution to this problem without circumventing the law of the land, without abrogating an agreement, without obviating the will of the American citizens of Vieques.
I will stand up against any effort to shut down the referendum in Vieques. Let the votes be cast. Let them be counted. And let the voice of the people be heard and respected.

I rise in support of this important sense of the Senate. I have a question to address to the Senator from Arizona who has done so much to bring this issue of clinical trials to the forefront. We heard yesterday important testimony from the head of the National Cancer Institute, Dr. Richard Klausner, who testified that clinical trials are not more expensive than standard therapies and that we need to make them even more accessible. This is what the sense of the Senate provides, what the underlying bill provides.
Probably the premier institutions in our country that deal with cancer, the large cancer centers, are the source of so much of the research done that translates into therapies, treatments and cures, for people suffering from cancer.
I ask the Senator from Arizona, I am sure his sense of the Senate as the underlying bill includes these cancer centers, places such as MD Anderson in Texas, Sloan Kettering in New York, or Dana-Farber in New York. Is my understanding correct that the cancer centers and the research they do as qualified research entities are included in the sense of the Senate?

I thank the Senator from Arizona. I congratulate him on his leadership on the underlying bill and on this important sense of the Senate which clarifies that clinical trials are an essential part of modern medical practice and providing the opportunity for physicians to refer patients for these lifesaving treatments. Although they are experimental, it is a way we make advances in medicine which eventually help everyone.
I yield the remaining time.

I thank the Chair. Mr. President, I add my thanks and gratitude to my good friend from Wisconsin. He has been a leader on this whole issue of campaign finance reform for so many years. He started as a young boy, and it has taken most of his life. I think progress is being made from a most unlikely source. I applaud the continued perseverance and commitment of the Senator.

Mr. President, we are in the midst of this very important debate about a Patients' Bill of Rights. I am hoping that before we break for the Fourth of July recess, the doctors, nurses, patients, and families of America will have the relief for which we have all waited for a very long time: making it clear doctors should be making our health care decisions; that nurses, not bookkeepers, should be at our bedsides; and that the Patients' Bill of Rights will be a reality.
I rise today because we have to consider our broad needs for health care not only in our country but around the world. Today as we meet and debate a Patients' Bill of Rights to make sure that Americans have access to the best health care in the entire world, there are millions of people around the world who do not have that opportunity or that right. I speak specifically of those who are suffering from HIV/AIDS.
We should be supporting vigorously the United Nations General Assembly on Meeting the Global HIV/AIDS Challenge and urging them to consider creative tools, such as debt relief, in efforts to combat HIV/
As the general assembly is meeting in special session in New York to try to come up with a strategic blueprint for fighting HIV/AIDS worldwide, it is imperative that we in America appreciate that this worldwide epidemic has nowhere near crested. Africa is ravaged. It has just begun to affect India, China, and Russia. This is an epidemic of historic proportions, and it needs a response that is historically appropriate.
Almost 60 million people worldwide have been affected by HIV/AIDS, and over 20 million men, women, and children have died. If current trends continue, 50 percent or more of all 15-year-olds in the most severely affected countries will die of AIDS or AIDS-related illnesses.
We are in the middle of summer vacation. We have many families and young people visiting our Capitol. We are always so happy to have them here and for them to take a few minutes to see their Government in action, but it is just chilling to imagine American 15-year-olds facing bleak futures as orphans or victims because they were born to infected mothers.
Every American should be concerned with what is going on beyond our borders. We should also be concerned because when it comes to disease today, there are no borders. People get on jet planes, people travel all over the world. There is no disease that is confined to any geographic area any longer. We have to recognize that for us to worry about the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Africa and Asia is not only the right thing to do, it is the smart thing to protect ourselves and to protect our children.
It is also important to recognize that the groundbreaking drug treatments that are keeping people with HIV/AIDS alive today are not available to those who suffer elsewhere. Less than 1 percent of HIV-infected Africans, for example, have access to life-extending antiretroviral medications. The challenges facing us are great, and we should work together to combat this global emergency.
I strongly support the formation of a global fund for infectious diseases such as AIDS, but also including tuberculosis and malaria. We are seeing tuberculosis and malaria in our own country. We are seeing the spread of malaria, which used to be confined to a tropical belt, beginning to move northwards, in part, I believe, because of global warming and desertification, so the mosquitos can travel further north and find hosts who traditionally have not suffered from malaria.
Tuberculosis is becoming epidemic in many parts of the world. In Russia, drug-resistant tuberculosis is a major killer.
I believe we should have a global fund to combat these infectious diseases, and I am very pleased the United States, private donors, and some other nations have taken steps to address the need for money as articulated by Secretary General Kofi Annan. We need between $7 billion to $10 billion annually. It is my hope that through a public-private partnership we are able to continue to invest in promoting prevention, treatment, and eventually a vaccine to prevent this devastating disease.
I am old enough to remember polio as a scourge that affected my life. I can remember my mother not letting me go swimming in the local swimming pool because of polio. I remember as though it were yesterday when the announcement of a vaccine was made. What a sense of relief that spread through my house and all of our neighbors, and we all lined up to get that shot we thought would protect us from what had been, up until then, such a serious, overhanging cloud in the lives of young people, as well as older people.
HIV/AIDS extracts a severe economic toll on nations worldwide. The disease spreads so rapidly. No one is immune from it. It has grave consequences for societies, and it threatens the interest of peace and prosperity around the world.
HIV/AIDS alone will reduce the gross domestic product of South Africa by $22 billion, or 17 percent, over the next decade. That is why I believe debt relief must also be part of any conversation about a broader global HIV/AIDS strategy.
While most African countries spend less than $10 per capita on health care, they spend up to five times that amount in debt service to foreign creditors. In fact, the burdens of debt repayment have come into direct conflict with public health efforts in some instances. For example, structural adjustment programs have sometimes required governments to charge user fees for visits to medical clinics, a practice that stands in the way of effective prevention and treatment programs. As discussions of global HIV/AIDS prevention proceeds, consideration should be given to the role of international debt relief in the overall plan to combat HIV/AIDS.
I have written to the U.N. General Assembly President Harri Holkeri to express my support for his efforts and to urge inclusion of debt relief strategies in any effort that comes out of the general assembly.
I also urge our own Government to look more closely at what we can do. In the last administration, we forgave a lot of our bilateral debt for the poorest of the nations, but we should look at expanding beyond the circle of the poorest of the poor to the next poorest of the poor, and we should also look at our multilateral debt.
I am hoping I will find support on both sides of the aisle for a sense-of-the-Senate resolution I will be submitting to express the policy view that debt relief can and should be an important tool.
I have visited African countries. I have visited Asian countries. I have visited HIV/AIDS programs. I have been in places where 12-year-old girls who were sold into prostitution by their families have come home to die in northern Thailand.
I have been in programs in Uganda which have done probably the best job I know of in Africa certainly to spread the message about how to prevent HIV/AIDS. I have listened to the songs that were taken out into villages to tell villagers about this new disease that nobody really knows where it came from or how it arrived, but to warn people about its deadly consequences.
I was fortunate and privileged last year to participate in the United Nations discussion about AIDS, and I sat with AIDS orphans: A young boy from Uganda whose father and then mother died of AIDS, leaving him responsible for his younger brothers and sisters; a young boy from Harlem whose mother died of AIDS; a young boy from Thailand who was also orphaned by this terrible disease.
In some parts of Africa now, one will only find children, and most of them are orphans. The rate of infection ranges from 15 to 35 percent, and I am deeply concerned we are still in some parts of the world in a state of denial about HIV/AIDS.
Certainly, both India and China face tremendous challenges to educate their population about this disease and to avoid practices that might spread it. It is commonplace in some parts of China for very poor villagers to sell their blood to make a little money. In so doing, they are subjecting themselves to the possible transmission of this terrible disease.
In other parts of Africa and Asia, even the best intentions to immunize children against measles or other communicable diseases lead to tragedy because the sterilization is not up to par and needles are reused, leading to the infection of people with HIV/AIDS.
I have long maintained there is a deep, profound connection between the economic health of a nation and the physical health of that nation's people. That is why we have to act now to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
There is so much the United States can and should do. We have the finest health care system in the world. We are the richest nation that has ever existed in the history of the world. We not only should care about people in other parts of the world because of this disease, but we should act in our own self-interest because there will be many parts of the world where it will be difficult, potentially even dangerous, to travel if the entire social structure and economy collapses because of the strain of HIV/AIDS, where tourists and business people from America will be told they should not go to do business. Suppose they are in an accident or suffer injury and might need medical care and that medical care might not be deliverable because the health care system has collapsed under the weight of HIV/AIDS.
I look forward to working with my colleagues in the Senate and in our United States delegation to the United Nations General Assembly special session on these and other desperately needed proposals to halt and reverse the social and economic damage caused by HIV/AIDS and the direct and immediate threat this pandemic poses to America and Americans. I urge my colleagues and I urge our Government and the United Nations to look deeply into the concept of forgiving debt in return for nations doing what we know works to prevent, treat, and eventually find a vaccine for this terrible disease.
I yield the floor.

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that Dr. Mary Catherine Beach, a legislative fellow in my office, be granted the privilege of the floor for the duration of the debate on S. 1052, the McCain-Edwards-Kennedy Patients' Bill of Rights.

Mr. President, I have the greatest respect for my good friend, the Senator from Nebraska, and I rise reluctantly, but firmly, to oppose the amendment he is sponsoring, along with Senators Kyl and Nickles, because I am concerned not only about the general issues that have been raised by other opponents, I am concerned also by the American Medical Association's very strong and vigorous opposition to this amendment, which they have made very clear to me and my office, as well as, I believe, every other Senator, because of their deep concern that this would be a step backward, permitting health plans to determine the services, drugs, supplies, or equipment necessary to prevent, diagnose, or treat a patient's condition, illness, or injury.
But I have a very specific reason for opposing it. I direct this to my good friend from Nebraska because this is something that deeply concerns me. This amendment allows health plans to define "medically necessary and appropriate" in a way that poses a great threat to all patients and families who require hospice and palliative care to treat the suffering associated with terminal illness.
The Washington Post, just a week ago, published a story outlining the various ways in which recent advances and end-of-life care have not yet reached children with terminal illnesses, causing an enormous amount of suffering for dying children and their parents and loved ones who have to watch that suffering at the end stages of a terminal illness. The article quotes one mother who says, looking back on her daughter's death, that "pain is such a huge problem."
There are two specific phrases within the safe harbor of the "medically necessary care" language in the Kyl-Nelson-Nickles amendment that directly undermines the needs of dying patients. First, the amendment declares that care provided "for the comfort of the patient" is not medically necessary care.
Any health care professional — or really any person, such as myself — who has stood at the bedside of a dying friend or a loved one knows that comfort of the patient is absolutely necessary and is often the most appropriate goal of care in those last days, weeks, and even months sometimes. At the very center of palliative care, and particularly in the hospice movement, is the belief that each of us has a right to die free of pain and with our human dignity as intact as possible.
The Institute of Medicine released a ground-breaking report in 1997 that concluded "too many people suffered needlessly at the end of life." A second Institute of Medicine report released last week also concluded that patients are suffering unnecessarily. Furthermore, studies have shown that specific types of patients — patients who are elderly, female, African-American, or children — are less likely to have their pain adequately controlled at the end of their lives.
The Kyl-Nelson-Nickles amendment is legislation that could be termed as declaring that the comfort of dying patients is not a legitimate goal of medicine. But to me, that has it backwards. Isn't the relief of suffering exactly what doctors are supposed to be concerned about?
A second and related problem is that this amendment allows plans to define as "medically necessary" care that is appropriate "to treat a medical condition, illness, or injury." This narrow definition compromises the delivery of appropriate care to dying patients by failing to recognize the legitimacy of care that focuses on the palliation of pain rather than a cure. This definition actually encourages overuse of invasive — and often futile — medical treatment and the underutilization of hospice and palliative treatment.
The Institute of Medicine report released this month concludes that "policies and practices that govern payment for palliative care hinder delivery of the most appropriate mix of services." A chapter of that report focuses on the terrible effect these policies have had on children. It found that services necessary to provide dying children and their parents with comfort and counseling are not recognized and certainly not even reimbursed by many insurance programs.
I believe the definition of "medically necessary care" proposed by this Kyl-Nelson-Nickles amendment would further obstruct access to hospice and palliative care services for patients suffering from terminal illness.
We have not done enough to relieve pain and suffering at the end of life. I served for many years on the board of a children's hospital. Back in those days, the idea of giving strong medication to a dying child was really not even considered a possibility for many reasons. People were not sure about the appropriate dosage. Some people were worried even with a dying child that the child might become addicted to strong pain relief medicine.
I have also seen friends who, at the end of their lives, had to cry out for and demand pain relief from an almost unbearable burden. They did not want to leave this wonderful life, but they knew that was going to happen and they wanted to do it in a way that relieved both them and their loved ones of the agony that comes at the end of so many devastating illnesses.
There are many wonderful hospice programs in our country, and many academic development centers are developing comprehensive palliative care programs specifically to focus on patient comfort at the end of life.
The Kyl-Nelson-Nickles amendment places the comfort of dying patients and their families beyond the language of the legislation, really rendering it illegitimate; providing this comfort would no longer be medically necessary or appropriate.
I ask unanimous consent to print in the Record the article I referred to earlier from the Washington Post called "Children of Denial."

Mr. President, I urge my colleagues to oppose this amendment not only for all the reasons others have enumerated but for this very specific issue. We are at the beginning of work that needs to be done in hospice care and palliative care, and I would hate to see us turn back the clock before we really started the race to determine what we should do to care for those who are in the last stages of life.
I urge all of my colleagues to join me in opposing this amendment and to support the ongoing efforts to provide more pain relief, more palliative care and, yes, more comfort to those who are leaving this life.
I thank the Chair.

Mr. President, let me state for the Record that the request I am about to make has been cleared on the Republican side.
I ask unanimous consent that the Judiciary Committee be discharged from further consideration of S. Res. 117 and that the Senate then proceed to its immediate consideration.

Mr. President, I rise today to introduce a resolution honoring John J. Downing, Brian Fahey, and Harry Ford, who gave their lives this past Father's Day while protecting the lives of others. Together, these brave men left behind three widows and eight children whom we also honor today for their sacrifice.
On June 17, as a treacherous five-alarm fire raged at the Long Island General Supply Company in Queens, NY, without hesitation, as they have done countless times before, nearly 350 firefighters and numerous police officers responded to the call for help. Two civilians and dozens of firefighters and police officers were injured. And three courageous fathers lost their lives. It was the last time their children would be able to spend Father's Day with them.
John Downing was 40 years old, an 11-year veteran of the New York Fire Department when he responded to the five-alarm blaze. He was a valiant public servant who had been recognized for his bravery. John left behind his wife Anne, his 7-year-old daughter Joanne, and his three-year-old son Michael.
Brian Fahey, 46 years old, and a 14-year veteran of the department from East Rockaway, NY, was also a husband and father of three. His years of service to his community were made proud by his courage. He is survived by his wife Mary and their three sons: Brendan, 8; and twins, Patrick and James, 3\1/2\ years old.
Harry Ford, age 50, gave nearly three decades of service to the New York City Fire Department. During his exemplary career, he received nine bravery citations. He is survived by his wife Denise; his daughter Janna O'Brien, age 24; and two sons, Harry, 12, and Gerard, 10.
Mr. President, I paid a call on the two firehouses early Sunday morning who had lost these brave compatriots, and I spent time talking to the men who go to work every day not knowing what is going to be asked of them, who sometimes go for, thankfully, days, or weeks, or months, and even years without ever having to put themselves in danger. But when the call comes, they are ready. And whether it is a call to respond to an emergency need because of an illness, an accident, or a huge raging fire that is about to get out of control, they represent the very best we have in our society.
We live in a society that seems to be in perpetual search for heroes, whether in the form of sports figures or screen idols. But to find true heroes, sometimes we don't have to look so very far from home. We certainly don't have to look any farther than the brave men we are honoring today.
The unmistakable courage and the incalculable sacrifices that they and their families have made for the good of their neighbors and their community are the kinds of virtues and values that should be held up to our children and ourselves as something we should all aspire to.
Finally, in so honoring these men, we honor the hundreds of thousands of public safety officers across this country that, every single day, risk their lives and put them and their families at risk to keep us safe from harm. Their strong tradition of bravery and sacrifice keeps our communities safe and fills our hearts with pride for their selfless acts of courage for others.
I hope that next year when Father's Day comes around, the children who have lost their fathers in this fire and those who have lost fathers and mothers because they were serving us will know how grateful we are for their sacrifice. I hope all of my colleagues will join me in supporting this resolution.
I yield back the remainder of my time.

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the resolution and preamble be agreed to en bloc, and the motion to reconsider be laid upon the table.

Mr. President, I rise today in opposition to provisions in the McCain amendment, and in underlying bill, S. 1077, which rescind funds from programs supported under the Workforce Investment Act, including the Dislocated Worker Employment and Training Program and the Adult Employment and Training Activities.
The underlying bill rescinds funds from WIA in order to pay for important increases in funding for title I education services and Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program. I support the need to increase essential funds for students in our highest-poverty schools and for low-income individuals who are being hardest hit by increasing energy costs. Indeed, I signed on in support of the increases for title I and LIHEAP. I do not think, however, we should increase funding for these, defense or any other programs by taking money away from New York workers at a time when these employment and training programs are most in need and are beginning to meet their potential.
At this time when upstate New York is facing more notice of layoffs, we should not be cutting back our support for dislocated workers. Last year, over 25,000 New York workers received notices warning them of layoffs — an increase of over 7,000 workers from 1998.
Over the past several months, we have learned that hundreds of workers at the Xerox facility in Webster, NY, will soon find themselves out of work; several hundred more New Yorkers who have spent years working for Nabisco in Niagara Falls also recently received notice that they would no longer have a job. Corning announced just yesterday that it will have to close three factories, resulting in a loss of nearly 1,000 jobs.
At a time when we see signs of our economy weakening, this bill would reduce funds specifically designated to assist workers who are victims of mass layoffs and plant closures. With the rescission in the base bill alone, New York can expect to lose approximately 29 percent of its dislocated worker funds. I have received hundreds of letters from New Yorkers — not only from concerned workers, but also from businesses who need trained workers.
Why are my colleagues suggesting that we should rescind WIA funds at a time when our economy is weakening and many of our workers will need these critical funds to be retrained and relocated in new jobs?
They are claiming that States are not spending and obligating funds quickly enough. I agree. But, I also agree that States and local communities have made tremendous progress in implementing the Workforce Investment Act.
Let's get the facts straight. States were not required to implement the Workforce Investment Act until July 1, 2000. Beginning July 1, 2000, States had 2 years to spend funds and were required to obligate 80 percent of their funds. Many counties in New York are doing a tremendous job — Chautauqua County, for example, has obligated 95 percent of its dislocated worker funds, as well as 95 percent of adult funds; the Town of Hempstead has allocated 90 percent of both its dislocated and adult worker funds; as has Erie County — all of which can expect to lose funds under this rescission.
I do know that there are at least eight counties in New York that have struggled in their implementation — working to get up to 19 Federal partners at the local level to offer services in One Stop training centers — and, as a result have obligated 70 percent or less of their funds. These counties need to do better and the State needs to do better in supporting their efforts. But, the way to do so is not to take funds away from a fledgling program that is aimed to assist our workers most in need of training and assistance.
I oppose these efforts to undermine the new Workforce Investment Act. I agree with accountability of Federal dollars, but I do not agree that we should unnecessarily punish workers before allowing the program to get up and running.

Mr. President, I stand here today not in opposition to moving forward with the Bankruptcy Reform Act, but to send a clear message that I continue to have strong reservations about whether this bill is both balanced and responsible. I have long said that debtors that have the genuine capacity to repay some of their debt should be required to do so, but abuses by creditors need to be stopped.
I grew up with a father who never accepted any credit — never had a credit card in his life. He taught me the importance of always working hard and paying your debts. I believe every American should work hard to spend responsibly and to repay their debts, but I also know that some families are hit by unexpected hardships.
This bill should not have the effect of targeting our most vulnerable consumers — women who are left with little resources as their husbands who were the primary breadwinners leave the family; or families with no health insurance who are struck with financial hardship when one family member becomes critically ill; or another family who suddenly finds that the primary breadwinner is laid off with little employment opportunities available in the region.
These are not the families who need to be further stuck by hardship of bankruptcy reform that is inflexible or overly harsh on debtors.
I voted for the S. 420, the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 2001, because I believed and still do believe that there were some important protections added to the Senate bill, but I will absolutely not vote in favor of the final bankruptcy reform bill if it does not include at least these minimal protections for our most vulnerable consumers.
During the floor debate on S. 420, the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 2001, I worked with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to add additional protections for women and children. I worked hard to ensure that once bankruptcy is complete, we do more to ensure that single mothers can collect the child support they depend upon. Senator Hatch and I passed an amendment to ensure that the holder of the claim, meaning the parent with custody of the child, most often the mother, is informed by the bankruptcy trustee of his or her right to have the State child support agency collect the nondischargeable child support from the ex-spouse. I believe this change will help inform women of their rights to have the State help them in their claims to collect child support.
In addition, I was concerned about competing non-dischargeable debt so I worked hard with Senator Boxer to ensure that more credit card debt can be erased so that women who use their credit cards for food, clothing and medical expenses in the 90 days before bankruptcy do not have to litigate each and every one of these expenses for the first $750.
These are the most minimal of changes that I believe need to be in the final bill. I still do not believe that they go far enough. I believe that the final bill should protect child support full stop. I do not believe that child support should have to compete with any credit card debt. But it should certainly not retreat from these changes. The cap on protected expenses should not be lowered to the House version of $250.
I also believe that the bill needs to include Senator Schumer's amendment to ensure that any debts resulting from any act of violence, intimidation, or threat would be nondischargeable. It was a victory for the Senate to include this important amendment to ensure that those who are responsible for violence against women's health clinics are held responsible for their actions. I do not believe we should retreat on this point.
Let me be clear. This bill should go further to protect consumers, but it should certainly not retreat from the consumer protections in the bill.
I will vote for cloture on this bill, but I believe that as we move to conference we need to continue to work to ensure that we continue to gain more balance between creditors and debtors.

Madam President, Riis Park serves an ethnically diverse population including hundreds of inner-city families, adhering to the ideas envisioned by Jacob Riis and carried on by City Parks Commissioner Robert Moses. By investing in this urban park, our government can ensure that it remains a viable resource for years to come. I stand in full support of funding for the Riis Park Natatorium Complex.

Mr. President, I rise today to pay tribute to Donna Centrella, a very special woman whom I met 2 years ago during my campaign in New York. Donna died on Monday after a long, brave battle with ovarian cancer.
I first met Donna in September 1999, when I visited Massena Memorial Hospital in Massena, NY. Donna had been diagnosed with ovarian cancer in August, but did not have health insurance to cover her treatment. Miraculously, she found a doctor who would treat her without insurance and she was able to afford care through a variety of State programs.
Perhaps even more astounding was her doctor's statement that she was actually better off without managed care coverage because he could better treat her that way. Without HMO constraints, they were free to make the decisions about the best procedures to follow for her treatment and care — her doctor could keep her in the hospital as long as needed and he would not have to get preapproval for surgery.
I have retold Donna's unbelievable story many times since meeting this extraordinary woman. Hers is a story that underscores the profound need in this country for immediate reform of the way we provide health coverage to our citizens. We owe it to patients like Donna to sign patients protections into law as soon as possible to ensure that we can provide the best medical treatment possible to everyone who needs it.
We have lost an ally, but I have faith that we will not lose the fight for greater patient protections. It saddens me greatly that Donna will not be here to see it happen. She was an amazing soul whose determination and strength will never forget. 

Madam President, I rise today to pay tribute to Donna Centrella, a very special woman whom I met 2 years ago during my campaign in New York. Donna died on Monday after a long, brave battle with ovarian cancer.
I first met Donna in September 1999 when I visited Massena Memorial Hospital in Massena, NY. Donna had been diagnosed with ovarian cancer in August, but did not have health insurance to cover her treatment. Miraculously, she found a doctor who would treat her without insurance and she was able to afford care through a variety of State programs.
Perhaps even more astounding was her doctor's statement that she was actually better off without managed care coverage because he could better treat her that way. Without HMO constraints, they were free to make the decisions about the best procedures to follow for her treatment and care: Her doctor could keep her in the hospital as long as needed and he would not have to get pre-approval for surgery.
I have retold Donna's unbelievable story many times since meeting this extraordinary woman. Hers is a story that underscores the profound need in this country for immediate reform of the way we provide health coverage to our citizens. We owe it to patients like Donna to sign patient protections into law as soon as possible to ensure that we can provide the best medical treatment possible to everyone who needs it.
We have lost an ally, but I have faith that we will not lose the fight for greater patient protections. It saddens me greatly that Donna will not be here to see it happen. She was an amazing soul whose determination and strength I will never forget. 

Madam President, I rise today to speak in support of S. 1218, the Iran Libya Sanctions Extension Act of 2001. This legislation will extend for another five years the Iran Libya Sanctions Act of 1996, which would otherwise expire on August 5, 2001.
In 1996 Congress unanimously enacted ILSA in response to Iran's emergence as the leading state sponsor of international terrorism, its accelerated campaign to develop weapons of mass destruction, its denial of Israel's right to exist, and its efforts to undermine peace and stability in the Middle East.
Five years later, the U.S. State Department's "Patterns and Global Terrorism," reported that Iran still remains "the most active state-sponsor of terrorism" in the world, by providing assistance to terrorist organizations such as Hezbollah, Hamas, and the Islamic Jihad.
Eleven short days from now, ILSA is set to expire. That is why we must act today to renew this important legislation to deter foreign investment in Iran's energy sector — its major source of income. By doing so we can continue to undermine Iran's ability to fund the development of weapons of mass destruction and its support of international terrorist groups.
In February of this year, I met with families of the American victims of the bombing of Pam Am Flight 103 in 1988. Brian Flynn, from New York City, recalled driving to John F. Kennedy airport to retrieve the body of his brother, J.P. Flynn, who had perished in the bombing. Brian remembered: "There was no flag, no ceremony, no recognition that he was killed simply for being an American."
Earlier this year, once again Brian drove to John F. Kennedy airport, this time, to go to the Netherlands to listen to the verdict against two Libyan nationals indicted for the bombing. A Libyan intelligence officer was found guilty of murder in the bombing, in the words of the court, "in furtherance of the purposes of . . . Libyan Intelligence Services." Yet Libya continues to refuse to acknowledge its role and to compensate the family members of 270 victims of the bombing. The State Department reports that Libya also remains the primary suspect in several other past terrorist operations. Brian and so many family members of the dozens of New Yorkers killed in the bombing, have written to me and conveyed how important it is for the United States to continue to hold Libya accountable for its support of international terrorism.
By acting now to renew ILSA, the Senate is sending a clear message to Iran and Libya that their dangerous support for terrorism and efforts to develop weapons of mass destruction are unacceptable and will not be tolerated.

Is there objection?
Without objection, it is so ordered.
The clerk will call the roll.

As the majority leader well knows, I am new to this body and I think what we have just seen raises, in my mind, serious questions about what it is we are trying to accomplish for the people of our States and our country.
As I understand the response of the distinguished Senator from Idaho, the delay is because somebody "unnamed" delayed something last year. That, to me, is a strikingly inadequate explanation for a delay that is holding up our efforts to help our oldest industry and our newest industry.
With the fact that New York's largest economic sector is agriculture, which most people outside New York would have no idea of, I have a great interest in the Agriculture supplemental bill because we have some aid in there for farmers who are following in the tradition of those having farmed in New York for more than 400 years. Our apple farmers are on the brink of extinction if they do not get some emergency help. We had hail last year that destroyed the crop in the Mid-Hudson River Valley; it took out orchards in the north country. So this is not any geographic issue. This is a national issue that has to be addressed.
At the same time, in New York, we have some of the cutting edge high-tech industries that are begging for the kind of direction the Export Administration Act will give them, the certainty about what they can and cannot export, whether we can be competitive globally. Both of these important pieces of legislation have to be addressed in the next week.
It is regrettable that instead of doing the people's business, dealing with the agricultural needs and the high-tech needs that really cut across every geographic and political line we have in our Nation, we see this kind of delay.
But I would ask the majority leader, is it your intention to do everything you can possibly do, as our leader, who has done, in my view, an absolutely tremendous job since assuming the leadership, to make sure that the people's needs are met? And that includes the Agriculture bill and the Export Administration bill.
Speaking just as one Senator, I do not think there is anything more important than doing the work we were sent here to do, casting the votes that will help people, and it is striking that we do not seem to have the cooperation we need on the other side.
But I would ask the leader if it is his intention to make sure that we do the people's business before we leave for the recess that is scheduled.

Madam President, I rise today to honor one of the extraordinary legacies of my predecessor, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who served in this body for 24 years representing the people of New York.
With some seeking to insert contentious language regarding Zionism into declarations emerging from the upcoming United Nations World Conference Against Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Related Intolerance in Durban, South Africa, I am reminded of Senator Moynihan's courageous statesmanship, when he condemned the 1975 U.N. resolution 3379 which infamously declared "Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination."
We should never forget the historic battle my predecessor waged to defeat this outrageous effort to de-legitimize the state of Israel and defame the Jewish people. Over 25 years ago, Senator Moynihan boldly called this hate-filled language "criminal." It was criminal then and it's still criminal today.
On the day the resolution passed, Senator Moynihan declared, "the United States . . . will never acquiesce in this infamous act . . . A political lie of a variety well known to the twentieth century and scarcely exceeded in all the annals of untruth and outrage. The lie is that Zionism is a form of racism. The overwhelming truth is that it is not."
From the moment he entered the Senate in January 1977, Senator Moynihan dedicated much of his energy to repealing this despicable attack on Israel and the Jewish people, delivering passionate speeches on the Senate floor. As chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Senator Moynihan introduced Joint Resolution 246, which called on the U.N. to repeal the 1975 resolution.
It took 17 long years to remove this stain from the United Nations' reputation. And as we begin this new century, nothing could be more damaging to the promise and integrity of the U.N. than to revive to this ignominious statement. In order to help prevent the U.N. from reviving one of the moments of its greatest shame, Senators Schumer, Smith, Lugar and I have written the following letter to Kofi Annan, the Secretary General of the United Nations, condemning any attempts to include inflammatory anti-Israel language into declarations associated with the World Conference Against Racism in Durban.
I ask unanimous consent that the letter be printed in the Record.

In 1975, Senator Moynihan warned his colleagues at the U.N. and the rest of the world that: "As this day will live in infamy, it behooves those who sought to avert it to declare their thoughts so that historians will know that we fought here . . . with full knowledge of what indeed would be lost."
Senator Moynihan recognized then, as we do today, that this language only serves to fuel hatred and bigotry throughout the world and has no place in international discourse. I am honored to have followed Senator Moynihan in the Senate, and I pledge to continue his tradition of promoting the principles of decency and human dignity and opposing efforts to sow hatred and bigotry, especially when they are cloaked in the guise of diplomacy.
I ask unanimous consent that the attached statement be printed for the Record.

In the aftermath of the attack, doctors believed Private Vinci's wounds were fatal, but he persevered. He received the Purple Heart and eventually was transferred to a hospital in Colorado, where doctors were able to remove one of the two bullets that had almost taken his life, but not both. He continues to carry with him the second bullet, which has never been able to be removed.
Disabled from his wounds, Benjamin Vinci returned to Port Chester after being discharged from the Army and resumed life as a civilian. For many years, Mr. Vinci worked as a vacuum cleaner salesman in Westchester County. He married Rose Civitella in 1945, and together they raised four children: Peter, Burnadette, JoAnn, and Joseph.
We honor and thank Benjamin Vinci for his tremendous sacrifice, vital contribution, and gallant service to our Nation. His acts of bravery are an exceptional example of the fortitude, determination, and strength of the American spirit. As Mr. Vinci carries the burden of his wounds and the bullet he received on that December morning of infamy, so too must we carry the memory of his heroic deeds, remembering and honoring all the men and women of that great generation — those veterans of World War II who saved our Nation, and the world.

Madam President, I ask unanimous consent to proceed to executive session to consider the following nominations: Calendar Nos. 262 through 285, and the military nominations placed on the Secretary's desk; that the nominees be considered en bloc; that the motion to reconsider be laid upon the table, the President be immediately notified of the Senate's action, and the Senate then return to legislative session.

Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the consideration of S. Res. 141, submitted earlier today by the majority and Republican leaders.

Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the resolution and preamble be agreed to en bloc, the motion to reconsider be laid upon the table, and that any statements relating thereto be printed in the Record.

Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the consideration of H.R. 1954, the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act, just received from the House.

Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the bill be read the third time and passed, the motion to reconsider be laid on the table, that any statements relating thereto be printed in the Record, with no intervening action or debate.

Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it adjourn until the hour of 1 p.m., Monday, July 30. I further ask unanimous consent that on Monday, immediately following the prayer and the pledge, the Journal of proceedings be approved to date, the morning hour be deemed expired, the time for the two leaders be reserved for their use later in the day, and there be a period for morning business until 2 p.m. with Senators permitted to speak for up to 10 minutes each with the following exceptions: Senator Durbin or his designee from 1 to 1:30 p.m.; Senator Grassley or his designee from 1:30 to 2 p.m.; further, at 2 p.m. the Senate resume consideration of the motion to proceed to S. 1246, the Agriculture supplemental authorization bill, with the time until 5:30 p.m. equally divided between the chairman and ranking member or their designees.

Madam President, the Senate will convene Monday at 1 p.m. with 1 hour of morning business. At 2 p.m., the Senate will consider the motion to proceed to the Agriculture supplemental bill. A cloture vote on the motion to proceed to the Agriculture bill will occur at 5:30 p.m. on Monday.
I have no further business to report, Madam President.

Mr. President, I rise in support of the amendment offered by the Senator from Florida. This is an issue that he brought to my attention some months ago following the initial debate over the arsenic standard. We had a good debate last night, with a very strong vote, to ensure that we get the right kind of standard as soon as possible so people will know what to expect from their drinking water. We also made it very clear that we want to help communities be able to meet these standards.
It should not be an unfunded mandate to take care of your health. We ought to have the best scientific information, made available through the studies that are done or commissioned, to provide the help that communities need to be able to protect themselves, particularly their children.
Senator Nelson came upon a problem I never knew existed. I cannot tell you how many times I have been around playground equipment that is wooden. I always thought it was really attractive. It is the kind I preferred. It is what I bought for my own daughter. It certainly never crossed my mind that — for good reasons, to prevent pest and termite infestations — manufacturers would want to treat that wood. I never thought about it.
But what Senator Nelson has determined — and I applaud him for this because it became an issue in Florida, and he brought it to our attention — is that something called CCA, chromated copper arsenic, is widely used as a preservative in pressure-treated wood, including playground equipment. This CCA is 22 percent arsenic.
I remember when I used to practice law, which seems as if it was a very long time ago, I had a case that involved treated wood that was treated at a plant in Tennessee. I went to visit it. The wood was treated with all kinds of chemicals, but it was used for telephone poles; it was used for railroad tracks; it was not used in playground equipment.
What Senator Nelson has learned is that, through rain and natural deterioration, the arsenic that is in this compound, CCA, to treat this wood, can leach into the ground and can even come off on one's hands. You think about all those little hands and all those little mouths and those little bodies kind of rolling around this playground equipment. I really commend the Senator for bringing this problem to our attention. Because of his hard work, the EPA and the Consumer Product Safety Commission are conducting reviews of the health and safety risks to children playing on and around CCA-treated wooden playground equipment.
I believe the Senator's amendment is necessary because, again, it sets a deadline. Otherwise, folks can just keep studying and talking and avoiding making a decision. But he is trying to put some teeth into this appropriations bill, which I commend and support because just the other day I had a friend of mine say she heard Senator Nelson speak on this issue in relation to playground equipment. She was just about ready to buy some playground equipment for her grandchildren. She does not know whether to buy it or not. She does not know whether it is safe or unsafe.
If you live in a State that gets as much rain as the good Senator's State of Florida, you have to be even more worried. If it is as humid as it is down there, you have to be more worried.
We do not want to make a decision that is not scientifically based, so we need to get these science studies done and the EPA and the Consumer Product Safety Commission making their decision. They have asked for public comment. But we should pass this Nelson amendment because it really directs the EPA to report to Congress as soon as possible — which is, in effect, a report to the public — so my friend can decide whether or not she is going to buy wooden playground equipment or plastic or steel, or whatever choice she is going to make.
I commend the Senator for understanding this is an issue that is not one of these abstract issues that only concerns somebody sitting in some ivory tower somewhere. This is an issue that concerns every mother and father who takes their child to play at a playground or anybody who is thinking about buying equipment for their backyard.
We need to look to a nonpartisan, independent source such as the scientists who will examine this issue, find out whether this CCA is or is not a health hazard, or whether it can be fixed, and if it can, so it can be a problem that can be prevented. This is one of those public service issues to which I really think we owe the people of this country an answer; otherwise, we may be unfairly tarring this industry. We may be preventing people from buying playground equipment that is totally safe. We don't know. We just know this CCA has arsenic in it. We need to get to the bottom of whether that is harmful or not.
I commend the Senator for his approach. I hope my colleagues on both sides of the aisle will support this amendment so we can get an answer sooner instead of later.
Mr. President, I yield back whatever time I might have been given.

Madam President, I also thank the chairman and ranking member for not only the work they have done on this bill but the work they will do on the farm bill this fall. I know this is a difficult matter.
Both the chairman and the ranking member have outlined the challenges ahead of us, but I know everyone in this Chamber is ready and willing to work together to get a result that will be not only fair to our farmers but will recognize the full extent of both agricultural and conservation needs that go hand in hand with agriculture throughout our country.
I rise today to say a few words about agriculture in New York because I have noticed many of my colleagues are surprised there is agriculture in New York. Many people, perhaps some in the gallery today, think of New York and think of New York City. They may fly into LaGuardia or out of JFK. They do not get a chance to travel throughout the State to see the beauty of the scenery and to know how important agriculture is to the livelihood, the economy, and the future of New York.
In every section of New York, even surprisingly in some of the boroughs of New York City, there are still some agricultural interests. Much of the State, from St. Lawrence to Orleans, to the entire southern tier out into Long Island, agriculture remains a critical part of the fabric of life in New York and is a crucial livelihood for countless New Yorkers.
In fact, agriculture still is the No. 1 economic sector in New York, which would come, I suppose, as a surprise to many people from the Midwest or the South. I have been fortunate, having grown up in the Midwest — actually in Illinois, right between the chairman and the ranking member of the Agriculture Committee — to know a little bit about Midwest agriculture. Then I have been honored to have lived in Arkansas, for which good friend Senator Lincoln, having come from a farming family, is a champion, so I know full well how critical agriculture is in the Midwest, in the South, in the West, but I do not want anyone in this Chamber or anyone in our country to overlook or forget how important agriculture is in the Northeast and particularly in the State of New York.
I received a letter from a farmer in Kent, NY. What he has written could be written from the chairman's State or the ranking member's State. I want to read what he said:
I am writing this letter with great concern on behalf of our family farm. Our family farm was started in early 1900 by my grandfather and grandmother when they came to America from England. I started working on the farm as a young man at the age of 7 by riding with my father and watching how to work and how to make a living, by providing food for the world in which we live. Now at age 46, I sit back and try to evaluate what is wrong with our agriculture picture. Our cost of production has gone through the roof as fuel, labor and growing mandates are taking our profit out of the picture. Our fresh fruit apples, after being packed out of storage, have a slim chance to exceed the cost of production. Our vegetable operation, along with our grain crops, are in the same position, due to commodity prices that are lower than 25 years ago, but yet fuel prices alone have more than doubled in 15 months.
He goes on to write:
Usually, there is always one commodity that excels each year to offset the poorer priced ones, but that has not happened in the past year. Your first response is to get your cost of production down and to establish a higher yield, but we have exhausted all of these options. Every time we have a potential for a commodity price increase, one of our competitors ship across the borders, keep prices low and here we sit in New York just trying to survive. I have a great deal of pride and want to do my part to keep agriculture the number one industry in our County of Orleans, State of New York. Let us get agriculture out of this situation and back on track immediately.
I could not agree with this gentleman more. What I hope we are going to be able to do, as the chairman, the ranking member, and the committee members craft their farming bill for this fall, is to make sure those of us who may not be on the committee but who represent farmers and a farming State, no matter how difficult that may be for some to believe, will also be at that table because we have to be heard on behalf of our farmers.
I want to point to this chart. In 1964, there were 66,510 family farms. In 1997, we are down to 31,757. Certainly, some of those farms were lost because New York grew. The county I live in became pricey, choice real estate for people who wanted to live near New York City. We are fighting to preserve the farmland we still have left in Westchester County.
We know there were inevitable changes. No one is arguing against the inevitability of change that is going to take farmland out of production, but in many parts of our State we lost population. There was not population pressure forcing people into the country, therefore doing away with available farmland. We lost farmland because our farmers were not given a fair shake, were not given the tools with which to compete.
As we look at the farm bill, I hope we are going to also look at the important essential role farmers play in conservation, preserving our rural countryside, making it possible to have high water quality and wildlife habitat. I know if it were not for farmers all up and down the Midwest and the South, there would not be as many ducks to hunt every year. I know farmers have played a critical role in preserving wildlife habitat for hunters and for the enjoyment of so many other people.
Farmers have a role not only in producing quality, affordable food, but also improving water quality and wildlife habitat, restoring wetlands, and protecting farmland from further development. I hope we are going to get some of that conservation assistance in the farm bill coming this fall. I would have preferred by far the bill that came out of the committee in the Senate. That was not possible because of the President's veto threat. That is what the ranking member just explained. I deeply regret that.
As the chairman, Senator Harkin, pointed out, this would not have busted the budget. This was forward funding that would have gone into next year. The dollars then could have been distributed not only to help our farmers but also to do the conservation work that they do for all of us.
I want to mention also that we have some crops in New York that do not produce a lot of money, less than $10,000, but we are proud of them. We have a lot of orchards in New York, going from 6,931 in 1964 to 2,436 in 1997. We still are proud of our apple growers. We are proud of our speciality crops.
In May, there was an article in the Washington Post about the plight of apple growers in Albany, NY. It told how this past March Susan and Gary Davis auctioned off the machinery they used to tend orchards and vegetables on a farm that had been in their family for a century. They said: You feel like you are letting them down, both past generations and your own children. But they just could not keep up with the costs, and their farm manager finally said he could not do it anymore. The grower gave up and moved to find a livelihood somewhere else.
We know we have to do more to make farming a viable alternative for those who are willing to put in the long hours, are willing to do the work that gives us a safe food supply. I consider food security part of national security. Certainly that is true when it comes to the speciality crops and also when it comes to dairy in New York.
Our dairy farmers are down to 8,732 farms. I bet a lot of people did not know there were 8,700 dairy farms in New York. We are the third largest dairy producing State in America, and we are proud of that fact. But we have to have some help. We have to be able to compete with our neighbors to the north, with our neighbors to the south, and with our neighbors to the west.
Milk is New York's leading agricultural product, creating almost $2 billion in receipts. We rank third behind California and Wisconsin. Our dairy farmers are probably the hardest working farmers, maybe the hardest working small businesspeople, one will find anywhere. It is a 24-hour-a-day, 7-day-a-week job. I was visiting with some of our dairy farmers on the shores of Lake Champlain. They have been there for seven, eight, and nine generations. This is a difficult, tough job. We should not make it any harder. We should be proud of those who are willing to do this work, and we should find ways to support them because it helps all of us.
Finally, I hope my colleague, Senator Schumer, and I are able to convey as clearly and, hopefully, persuasively as possible that when agriculture is discussed, New York should be at the table. I thank everyone in this Chamber for giving us the opportunity to have our farmers receive the same help that all of our farmers in America need.
I thank the Chair.

Mr. President, I rise to join the senior Senator from New York, Mr. Schumer, in paying tribute to the late Paul R. Carey. I was also honored to have been invited to speak at the memorial service for Paul here in Washington last week, and I wish every Senator could have been there to share in the outpouring of emotion and affection for this wonderful young man. My husband and I knew Paul Carey well and we considered him a dear friend. Paul made many important contributions to President Clinton's work in the White House, and he remained a close friend after he left the White House to become a Commissioner of the Securities and Exchange Commission. He touched so many of us with his wonderfully passionate attitude toward life and his truly special gift for friendship. I join Senator Schumer in paying tribute to Paul Carey, and in expressing condolences to Governor Carey, to Paul's 11 brothers and sisters, and to his many friends. He was a great New Yorker and we will never forget him.

Mr. President, it is an honor to be here today to submit a resolution to recognize the contributions of minority women to women's suffrage and to the history of our country. This resolution establishes an Advisory Committee and directs the Architect of the Capitol to enter into a contract for the design and construction of a monument commemorating the contributions of minority women.
I was so pleased when Congressman Davis introduced this resolution. His decision was inspired by the observations of a young woman working in his office who noticed, as she toured the Capitol, that there are so few women, and even fewer minority women, represented in these sacred halls.
The under-representation of women and minorities does a disservice to the thousands of schoolchildren who tour the Capitol every year. I believe the time has come, and is in fact long overdue, to create a statute honoring the contributions of minority women who were instrumental in building our country and leaders in extending equal rights to all people.
I can cite many examples of minority women who I would like to see considered for recognition. Women with New York roots such as Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth and Maud Nathan have made considerable contributions to our nation's history.
Harriet Tubman, whose home was in Auburn, NY, escaped slavery and then risked her life again and again to return and lead so many others to freedom. Harriet Tubman's motto was, "keep going." She would encourage escaped slaves in their journey by saying, "Children if you are tired, keep going; if you are scared, keep going; if you are hungry, keep going; if you want to taste freedom, keep going." Harriet Tubman went on to be an active leader in the women's movement, to work for schools for freed slaves and to establish services for the elderly and destitute. Her actions were selfless and her courage is of heroic proportions.
Sojourner Truth was born enslaved in Upstate New York. After her release from slavery, she went on to work as an abolitionist and then as a leader in the women's movement. She was a highly effective speaker, and used her voice to see that equal rights would be extended to all people regardless of the color of one's skin or one's gender. Maud Nathan is another example of a New Yorker who was influential in the women's suffrage movement and served as an early and innovative consumer advocate, organizing for better conditions for working women.
I often think of the courage and vision of these women and so many others who put their lives on the line in the abolitionist, suffrage, civil rights and women's movements, and it is a great sense of pride to me that so many women leaders were from New York.
It is our responsibility to make sure that the contributions of minority women with stories similar to Truth, Tubman, Nathan, and so many others, are told in our schoolrooms, at our dinner tables and yes, celebrated in the halls of Congress.
In 1997, after more than 75 years of storage in the crypt, a monument recognizing suffragists Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott was moved to a visible location in the Rotunda. This was the right decision then, and no doubt has aroused the interest of so many people who have had the opportunity to view it since the move.
Now we have an opportunity to make significant strides toward telling a far more accurate story of our Nation's collective history by celebrating the minority women who were behind so many of our nation's important social movements. Their commitment, resilience and courage can be a great source of strength to the next generation of women who will assume the struggles shaping our time.

Thank you, Mr. President. I thank my colleagues for their outpouring of support, their concerns, and their many offers of additional aid that has come to the rescue of our people as a result of this devastating tragedy.
Yesterday dawned a beautiful day in New York. My daughter told me it was one of those days where the sky was totally clear, there was a breeze, people were starting to line up at the polling places to vote because it was primary day, an election day, a continuation of the commitment to democracy and self-government that has set us apart from every society that has ever existed because of the longevity of our democracy and the will of our people to constantly renew themselves.
New Yorkers went from standing in line to vote to standing in line to donate blood in just a few hours. I do not think any of us will ever get out of our minds the images we saw on television of the plane going into the first tower, the plane going into the second tower, and the plane going into the Pentagon, but there were tens of thousands of our fellow Americans, people who live in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut, people literally from every part of our country and, indeed, the world for whom this was not an event they watched in horror on television but lived through and in too many instances did not survive.
We are beginning to find out what that was like. Chuck and I have a lot of friends who worked in those towers, who worked in the center, and worked nearby. We are hearing the stories of husbands and wives grabbing cell phones and calling home to say: I love you; goodbye.
We know, and I assure every person in this body, in the House, and many, many of our fellow citizens, when we finally know the names of those killed and injured, they will know someone.
This was an attack on New York, but it was really an attack on America. I have been very gratified, as I know that Chuck has and all of our colleagues in the House, by the strong support we have received from the President. I am very grateful. We have expressed our appreciation.
Chuck and I will be going to New York this afternoon with FEMA, and we could not ask for more than we have received in the immediate aftermath of this horrific attack.
We are by no means anywhere near the end of what it will take to continue the search and rescue efforts. We are finding people even as we speak. Yet we know there is a very grim task ahead to do everything we can to find every person, to account for every single person who went to work. That is all they did. They went to work on a beautiful September day in New York.
We will also stand united behind our President as he and his advisers plan the necessary actions to demonstrate America's resolve and commitment, not only to seek out an exact punishment on the perpetrators but to make very clear that not only those who harbor terrorists but those who in any way give any aid or comfort whatsoever will now face the wrath of our country.
I hope that message has gotten through to everywhere it needs to be heard: You are either with America in our time of need or you are not.
We also stand united behind our resolve, as this resolution so clearly states, to recover and rebuild in the aftermath of these tragic acts. New York was not an accidental choice for these mad men, these terrorists, these instruments of evil.
They deliberately chose to strike at a city which is a global city. It is the city of the 21st century. It epitomizes who we are as Americans. So this in a very real sense was an attack on America, on our values, on our power, on who we are as a people. I know, because I know America, that America will stand behind New York, that America will offer whatever resources, aid, comfort, or support that New Yorkers and New York require because the greatest rebuke we can offer to those who attack our way of life is to demonstrate clearly we are not cowed in any way whatsoever.
I hope that within a short period of time, I say to Senator Warner, we see scaffolding on the side of the Pentagon. After we finish the search and rescue and recovery work that is being carried out heroically there, I hope we all see a clear signal that we are rebuilding, that our defenses are more resolute than ever.
I hope similarly that lower Manhattan has the same kind of image to project because the reality will be that we are rebuilding and reconstructing and making clear that just as our military might is unchallenged and uncowed, so are our economic, our social, our political values epitomized by New York.
I have expressed my strong support for the President, not only as the Senator from New York but as someone who for 8 years had some sense of the burdens and responsibilities that fall on the shoulders of the human being we make our President. It is an awesome and at oftentimes awful responsibility for any person. I know we are up to it, I know we are ready for it, and I know that everyone in this body represents every American in making clear that we are united and stronger than ever.
It is with a heavy heart — really a sense of heartbreak — that I rise today in support of this resolution, but it is also with a great sense of pride, first in the people of New York who responded as New Yorkers always do when times get tough. There was not a sense of panic. There was order, and there was an immediate outpouring of help. Those men and women whom we sent in to rescue our fellow Americans — there is no way adequately to express our gratitude to our firefighters, our police officers, our emergency personnel, our doctors and nurses and medical personnel. They responded at the height of a tragic, unexpected attack with the kind of grit and courage we expect from New Yorkers.
To all of those who are missing a loved one, there are no words any of us can express except to tell you in the clearest possible terms: We will in a united American response support you, offer assistance to you, stand with you, and pursue those who reached deep into your families and homes yesterday and took someone you loved away from you.
There will be a lot of work ahead of us in this body and in the House, and we will pursue that. I am grateful for the support we have received. Thank you very much.
(Applause.)

Mr. President, I wanted to take just a few minutes of morning business to report to my colleagues about my visit, along with Senator Schumer, to New York yesterday, to convey the appreciation that New Yorkers feel, starting with our Governor and our mayor but going down through the people whom I saw — whether they were a firefighter, or police officer, or emergency medical technician, or someone standing on the street — for the unified and extraordinary support that has been demonstrated by our entire country, starting with our President.
Senator Schumer and I flew to New York with Administrator Joe Allbaugh, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for the purpose of assessing the damage and attending a very long briefing with the Governor and mayor and their respective staff who are on the front lines dealing with this tragedy.
We took a military plane from Andrews and flew to LaGuardia where we got into helicopters. The helicopters flew us to the tip of Manhattan where we circled from the East River toward the Hudson and were close enough in to see the burning debris, to see the wreckage, the crumpled destruction of the buildings that had once stood there — a sight that the only comparable basis I think most living Americans would have, such as our distinguished senior Member, Senator Inouye, is what war was like in World War II, or Korea, or Vietnam.
We took another pass so we could get in a little bit closer. As we did, we saw dozens and dozens of people running away from the site. We later learned that the continuing danger from these structurally damaged and unsafe buildings had driven our rescue workers out.
We landed at the heliport on the East Side and went in to meet with the mayor and the Governor. We had some time to talk with the press, where everyone expressed the solidarity and unity that the people of New York are certainly feeling between and among themselves, and that we are grateful for the support that our President, our Congress, our entire Government, and people have given New York.
We then went in a convoy down to the site. I wish every one of my colleagues could have been with us, because the streets were lined with people holding American flags and signs expressing their gratitude and their thanks to the many workers and volunteers who had come to help, and a real sense of resolve and demonstration of support for our Nation.
Because of the difficulties with the buildings, we were not able to go in as close as we had originally planned. So we stopped at a place short of the immediate area that one could approach and still not interfere with the search and rescue mission or be in danger. We put on our masks because the acrid smell of the still burning debris is extraordinarily oppressive. We got a briefing on the spot from some of the people who were directly in charge of the work that is being done.
I felt as though I were on the edge of hell. I watched the smoke rising. I could see the twisted wreckage, and I had a much clearer visual image because of my helicopter view. I saw the people who have been there hour after hour since this vicious attack occurred coming toward me. Their shift was over. They were seeking some respite — firefighters in their uniforms covered from head to toe with dust and debris, exhausted, and dragging their fire axes with them.
The impression and feeling that one gets from actually being even as close as I was is so much greater with respect to the devastation than we see on our television screens. The television in a sense contains a miniaturized view of what has happened in New York.
When we then stood there for a few minutes — and that is all we were able to spend there — we visited with people who were looking for their lost loved ones. One mother in particular had just come down to the area hoping against hope to hear something about her son. Residents who had lost their apartments, their offices, and their businesses were standing on the side of a familiar street in a totally awful, inexplicable new circumstance.
We then went to the police academy which has been set up to be the command center since the city's command center was lost in the collapse of one of the ancillary buildings to the two towers, and we had a very long and very informative briefing from the mayor, from the Governor, and from all of the people on the front lines — the police commissioner and others who talked about where they were in the struggle that they are engaged in against this massive mountain of debris.
Just that night they had moved out more than 120 dump trucks filled with debris. The estimate from the Army Corps of Engineers is that there will be at least 500,000 tons of debris.
In addition to the immediate search and rescue and cleanup work that has to go on, the power situation, the loss of energy and telephone and communication services, has meant that the New York Stock Exchange could not open for business yesterday. It has meant that there are still many offices of our major financial institutions unable to reopen.
The humanitarian needs are enormous. There is an armory down on Lexington Avenue at about 25th or 26th Street that will be open for those whose family members and loved ones and friends are missing so that they can go down and identify, and have that registered, and provide additional information that may be required for identification.
The overall impression that I certainly take from that experience yesterday is of the pride I feel in the work that is being done, of the leadership given by our mayor and our Governor, of our police and fire and emergency personnel, the extraordinary readiness of our hospitals to care for the injured, the tragedies — there are not as many injured as they had expected — and the realization that we have a very big job ahead of us, a job of cleaning up and rebuilding and reconstructing.
I asked for some estimate from the mayor and the Governor as to what we were looking at because this is something for which we have to plan. They were obviously unable to say what the total estimate would be of the costs that have already been incurred and will necessarily have to be incurred in the future, but they know that they could immediately explain and justify $20 billion of direct costs. We will be asking our colleagues for a show of support, as a way of recognizing that the epicenter of this attack on our country occurred in New York City.
I took a late train back last night because I needed to be here to work with my colleagues on not only the further understanding of the level of devastation and need that has occurred but to answer questions and to be available as we continue to try to sort out what kind of national response is required.
I am very pleased that the President will be going to New York tomorrow afternoon. I applaud and salute him for that decision. I know it was a difficult decision because of the security issues that surround the movement of any President. I personally, on behalf of my constituents, thank him.
I will be meeting, along with Senator Schumer, and others, at the White House this afternoon with the President, where I will personally not only convey my appreciation for his leadership, his commitment, and his visit tomorrow, but also the specifics about the requests that the Governor and the mayor have made for additional and specific Federal assistance.
In addition, I introduced legislation earlier today that will be cosponsored by many colleagues on both sides of the aisle. It has an identical companion bill in the House. It is S. 1422, which will expedite the process by which the Federal Government provides benefits to the families of public safety officers, firefighters, police officers, emergency service personnel, and others who lost their lives in the line of duty.
I am very pleased, once again, that the President, in his video-phone conversation with the mayor and the Governor, stated his strong support for this legislation.
It has been said that more public safety officers lost their lives in the terrorist attack against the United States on September 11 than in any other single event in modern history.
We may not know exactly how many rescuers gave the ultimate sacrifice yet, but I was told by the acting commissioner yesterday that they are missing 300 firefighters.
I just was handed a note that is a very good piece of news, that they have just found two firefighters and one citizen still alive, which is why the search and rescue mission has to continue. We cannot give up. We know from cell phone communication and from the experience and intuition of our firefighters and rescue personnel on the scene that it is still possible — as we just learned — for people to be alive buried under that rubble. We will not give up until we find every single person.
Yet when we look at who is on the front lines, it is not me carrying the ax. It is not me as one of the ironworkers who rushed down to volunteer their services to help remove some of the debris. It is not me as a police officer who is on the front lines. It is these men and women who have made the sacrifice to protect us, and to respond as they would have at a time of battle. And, in effect, when this act of war took place, they were our front-line soldiers.
The Federal Government provides a one-time benefit payment to the families of public safety officers lost in the line of duty through the public safety officer benefit program. Unfortunately, these benefits are often delayed for long periods of time because of very burdensome regulatory applications.
In fact, I stood in this Chamber back in May to commend the sacrifice of brave New York City firefighters who lost their lives in a Father's Day blaze in Queens. Their families are still struggling to complete the application process. They fill it out and they are told they need more information.
It is imperative that we take action now to ensure that the family members of those brave men and women who lost their lives in this terrorist attack are not confronted with the same onerous process.
So the legislation that I have introduced today would direct the Department of Justice to expedite the process for these families of those who lost their lives while responding at the World Trade Center in New York City, the Pentagon in Virginia, or in Stonycreek Township, PA. Given what I heard on television from the President, and the extraordinarily broad support that I have for this already in the Senate, I do not think this will be a controversial piece of legislation. But I hope it can be considered as soon as possible to send a tangible message to our firefighters, our police officers, and our emergency personnel that we are with them and their families in their time of loss.
Finally, Mr. President, we are just realizing the full depth of the humanitarian crisis and grief and loss that has occurred. For the children who have now been orphaned, the husbands and wives who have been widowed, the parents who are facing what no parent should have to face ever — the loss of their son or their daughter — there are no words adequately to describe or express our sense of loss as a society.
I am very grateful that the city, the State, and FEMA will be on the ground with grief counseling, with psychological help, with mental health services because having been to more disasters in my life than I wished, I know that those who do not bear any visible injuries or scars carry deep and lasting wounds.
We will, as a nation, not only seek out the enemy wherever he may be, but we will also care for the grieving and the wounded. We will, I know, do everything required to provide whatever help and assistance we can as a nation.
I also hope that for those who were far away from any of the attacks on September 11, they, too, will talk with one another and comfort each other.
I was very grateful and proud to see Laura Bush, Mrs. Bush, on television today talking about the need to have an open conversation with our children, depending upon their ages, to reassure and comfort them because the binding up of our wounds as a nation goes far beyond lower Manhattan, or Arlington, VA.
We have all been stricken by this cowardly act of terrorism, but I am confident that we will respond with the same resolute purpose that has always defined us as a nation, with the same compassion that marks us as a people, and with the same resolve to not only defend ourselves wherever and whenever that is necessary, but to rebuild and reconstruct the human spirit and the physical terrain of America.
Thank you, Mr. President.

Madam President, I thank the Senator from West Virginia. I rise to join the comments of my colleague, Senator Schumer.
Many of us recognize the need for immediate action to aid our struggling airline industry and are prepared to do so. We also appreciate greatly the continuing bipartisan cooperation that is helping this body address the needs of our country in the wake of the terrible attacks of September 11.
I am very grateful that the long negotiations in the House and the Senate over the last several days, along with the White House, have resulted in a process to provide relief to families who have either lost a loved one or sustained significant personal injury.
We are also grateful that the legislation provides more support for essential air services, particularly in many of our more rural areas, such as Watertown, NY, that are totally reliant on air service which still comes in to serve those communities.
The passage of this legislation can only be a beginning. We also must make our airports as secure as possible. I am honored to join in legislation Senator Hollings and Senator Rockefeller and others are putting forward to address the security issues so that Americans have the confidence I know they should have in flying once again, resuming our normal life.
We also will have to work together to develop a process so the many businesses that have sustained losses will be able to seek relief in some expedited process and not get buried and even bankrupted by an extensive round of litigation. I just learned that the litigation that was filed following the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center is still ongoing. Businesses have no certainty, no resolution of what their liability, if any, might be. We need to avoid that in the wake of this tragedy and do everything we can to come up with a process that deals with the needs of other businesses as well as the airline industry.
I also hope that the assurances we have received with respect to the airline workers who have been laid off or displaced will be addressed as soon as possible. I am well aware that a package being considered to help the workers was stripped out of this bill. We have to revisit it. It is something that is growing in importance day by day. There are now at least 74,000 people affected. We expect in the next few days that number to grow to 100,000. I suggest we look at some kind of an aid package modeled after trade adjustment assistance to extend unemployment insurance, job training, support services to airline workers and other workers who have been directly affected by the attacks on our country.
We also will have to look at the way our entire transportation system operates. I am very proud of the way Amtrak stepped in to fill the need for the movement of passengers and goods. Their ridership is up nationwide. They have honored airline tickets of stranded airline passengers and shipped relief and medical supplies. Amtrak has also made security upgrades on trains and in stations. But we need to do much more to address the critical needs in the Northeast corridor as well as the rest of the country.
I look forward to working with my colleagues. I see my good friend Senator Hutchison from Texas who led the fight on the high speed rail bonding act. That is just one of the many issues we need to consider as we look at transportation, again, as part of national defense.
I well recall how President Eisenhower obtained the funding for the Interstate Highway System because it was part of national defense. Our highways, our airways, and our railways are all part of our national defense infrastructure.
Finally, I say once again how grateful we in New York are for the tremendous and continuing outpouring of support from the American people. I particularly thank the President for his strong support. I was overcome by his absolute resolute commitment to rebuilding New York in his speech last night as well as the other very strong words of reassurance and resoluteness he delivered with respect to the challenges we face. I appreciate greatly his leadership and his support throughout this crisis.

Mr. President, I, too, thank the chairman and ranking member and a number of our distinguished colleagues who have risen to support and oppose the Bunning amendment. I believe many Members in this Chamber either had no well-informed or formed opinion prior to September 11, or, perhaps, were inclined to support a new round of base realignment closings. It is with some regret that I rise in support of the amendment from the Senator from Kentucky. I believe after September 11, it is imperative we have more information available than we currently have.
There are many arguments that have already been made on the floor, very good ones, from our colleagues from Arizona, Rhode Island, Delaware, and Florida, as to what efficiency issues should take precedence. I agree we need to constantly be evaluating our defense budget and expenditures, to become as efficient as possible. Yet I also believe there are serious security concerns we are only beginning to address. I take very seriously the Secretary's letter which has been referred to and which has been read into the Record.
I believe my colleague from New Mexico, Senator Bingaman, is correct in saying the President and the Secretary have inherent power to realign, depending upon the needs we face in any kind of strategic or emergency situation.
We are about to engage in a broad-scale reevaluation of our homeland defense and security. We are going to be asking ourselves some very tough questions about our readiness, about the proper intersection between our domestic policing agencies and functions and our military.
At this point, I think there are several factors that have to be addressed in addition to the request of the Department of Defense and the recommendation from the Armed Services Committee before many Members would be comfortable voting for a new round. I am not sure the new round, if it is only a Defense Department review, will adequately look at some of these other broader issues that may have implications for both physical infrastructure and force deployment.
Some have said the QDR, which is expected by the end of this month, is out of date now. I don't believe that is the case, at least from what I am told and read in the paper; that the quadrennial review that the Department has been undertaking will have some very significant recommendations that should be digested and taken into account with respect to moving forward on another round of base realignments and closings.
It is important we integrate our domestic and military capacities in a way we have never had to think about before. Many were deeply concerned when we read reports of the short time, but nevertheless, unfortunately delayed time, that it took to scramble fighters into the air to try to deal with the impending threat and the potential threat that might have still been out there from additional hijackers. I don't know that the BRAC round has the same substantive understanding or impact that we have had in years past, given the new threats we have so tragically suffered. I would be very confident and supportive of our chairman and ranking member and members of the Armed Services Committee, working with the administration, coming up with a proposal that does make some sense.
I listened very carefully to the comments of the Senator from Arizona — maybe certain bases should be taken off the table. Maybe they should. That is something we have never talked about before, but in the context of the new threats we face, I think we have to think differently. It may be we may have a BRAC round where some bases would be off the table, some of the assets that we have would be put to one side and we say they are essential to homeland security and they are essential to our projection of force abroad. Therefore, any BRAC round would not look at those. That might be an idea worth considering because I think everything changed on September 11. A threat that was not understood as being so deadly and imminent has caused such terrible destruction and tragedy.
I, for one, will support the Bunning amendment at this time because I think we have to reevaluate what we mean when we think about closing bases and realigning our forces. No one should argue about the efficiency measures that need to be taken, so that we do, No. 1, get the most effective use of our dollars; and, No. 2, provide the kind of infrastructure and resources that our all-volunteer military deserves to have.
I am concerned at this point we may not be ready for the "son of" BRAC. There may be the need to rethink how we get to the level of bases that are required. I think perhaps for the first time we have to seriously take into account the new mission that the President has given for homeland security, to make sure there is, if necessary, the kind of integration that will make us safe at home as well as abroad in terms of America's values, interests, and security.
I rise with some regret because I have the greatest of respect for our chairman, our ranking member, and those who support this request for another round. I probably will very much end up supporting it, but only after we give the kind of thought I think is required today, to take into account the new threats and perhaps do it differently than we have done it before after we carefully evaluate what kind of presence we need, taking into account homeland security. I would support that kind of approach. That is not what is being proposed at this time. I urge my colleagues to support the Bunning amendment.
I yield the floor.

Mr. President, I come to the Chamber to discuss further the need for transportation security that encompasses not only our airlines but also our rail lines and our ports. Others with their own experiences and perspectives have already spoken to these issues and I am sure will continue to do so because as we address these critical needs of transportation security, it is imperative we look at all the means of transportation our people require and that we found to be particularly important in responding to the events of September 11.
I want to focus my remarks on Amtrak and our rail transportation system. I think anyone who followed the events of September 11 is well aware that Amtrak played a critical and essential role in responding to this national disaster. We know that without Amtrak being able to respond, New York would have been cut off. The natural flow of commerce and passengers between Boston and Washington, the busiest rail corridor in our country, would have been severely undermined. We know, too, that Amtrak did its part to make sure people not only could reach their destinations but, for example, those who had planned to fly by air when our air system was shut down, their tickets were honored and they were part of the continuing and increasing flow of people and goods that demonstrated that America was still moving.
Ridership on Amtrak has been up 17 percent across the Nation and certainly in the Northeast corridor, which was so devastated by the attack on the Pentagon, the closure of our airports, the attack in New York City, the continued, until thankfully today, closure of our Washington National Airport. We know that Amtrak's increase here was up by 30 percent.
How do we make sure this critical mode of transportation is safe and secure in the future? We cannot be in a position of looking backwards. We have to look forward and say, what do we need to do to make sure our transportation system is redundant and safe? I believe we have to focus, as we look at transportation security, on ensuring that our thousands and thousands of rail passengers are safe.
I am grateful Amtrak has come forward with a specific plan to address the needs of those passengers. We need, for example, more police officers on our trains, more canine units to inspect the trains, more power and switch upgrades to ensure they absolutely run without any delay or disruption.
In New York, we have immediate safety concerns which demand we act now, not later — hopefully in time to make sure we are always moving — and, if there is any natural or other disaster, that we keep our people moving.
I want to bring to the attention of my colleagues some specific safety concerns. Anyone who has ever been on a train in or out of New York knows, I assume, that there are four tunnels under the East River and two tunnels under the Hudson River that serve as vital links between New York City and the surrounding area and the rest of America.
These tunnels were built in 1910, and now almost a century later they have not undergone any serious security upgrade. Under today's regulations, the tunnels would never be allowed to be constructed in the same shape in which they currently exist.
Penn Station in New York City is the busiest railroad station in the United States. More than 500,000 passengers, from all parts of our Nation, on more than 750 trains pass through Penn Station each day. As many as 300,000 commuters pass through the East River tunnels on the Long Island Railroad trains each day. So these tunnels are essential to our national railroad network and to the moving of people who commute every day in and out of New York City. The tunnels are so essential that we must turn our attention to ensuring they are safe for the hundreds of thousands of people who use them every single day.
If for some reason a train were to become incapacitated in one of our tunnels, the only means of escape would be through one of two antiquated spiral staircases on either side of the river or by walking in the dark almost 2 miles out of the tunnels. These are also the only routes by which firefighters and other emergency workers can get into the tunnels.
I have a picture, and it shows a narrow 10-flight spiral staircase which serves as the evacuation route for passengers as well as the means for rescue workers to enter the tunnels. I can barely even imagine what the situation would be like under the ground, under the rivers, if some kind of disaster were to occur, with passengers and crew trying to move up this narrow spiral staircase and rescue workers trying to move down; or, in the alternative, people being, in some instances, carried or trying to get out on their own going 2 miles in whatever conditions existed at the time.
I bring this to the attention of my colleagues because I think it is imperative, as we look at transportation security, that we do not turn our backs on the hundreds of thousands of people every single day who use our railroads. I fully support adding air marshals on our flights. I support federalizing the inspection that passengers and cargo and luggage must go through, and I support doing everything we humanly can think of that will guarantee to the American public we are doing all that can be imagined to make our airlines safe.
I also want to be able to stand in front of the people in my State who rely on these trains to get to and from work, who rely on these trains to commute, who travel out of New York City, and people all over our country who similarly rely on our trains, that they also will be secure. We don't want to leave any American out of our security efforts. This is an opportunity to do right what is required, what we now know will prepare America for any future problems.
The airline security bill, which I hope we will be considering soon, calls for the creation of a Deputy Secretary of Transportation Security who will be responsible for the day-to-day operations of all modes of transportation. I applaud this provision. I think it is long overdue. It certainly will be a strong endorsement of the kind of broad-based security required for our millions of airline passengers, for those who use our ports, for those who come in and out of our transportation network, and for the 20 million passengers who rode Amtrak last year.
Over a week ago — it is hard to keep track of time in the last weeks — 40 of our colleagues took the train to New York City. I am so grateful. For some, it was the first time they had been on the train. It was fun to see their surprise and enjoyment provided by the ride to and from New York City. They were, in a sense, following in the footsteps of the hundreds of thousands of people who either have used trains out of necessity or out of choice for years or who were forced to use trains in the wake of September 11. And, thank goodness, the trains were there.
I cannot even begin to calculate the economic and psychological costs we would have suffered had we been totally shut off. We could not have moved people as easily as we did if Amtrak had not responded as well as it did in putting on additional equipment and personnel.
I hope my colleagues will remember this picture of this spiral staircase. I hope they will think about everyone they have ever known who perhaps has been a passenger, as I have been many times on these trains, through these tunnels. I hope they will join in the commitment we must make to every single American that we will guarantee the highest possible level of security for all transportation. It is the least we can do. I look forward to working with my colleagues to make sure it happens.

I thank the chairman of the committee who has done such a tremendous job of leadership in the wake of the terrible attacks of September 11. I commend him and the ranking member, the distinguished Senator from Arizona, and thank them for their tireless work and their constant reminders of the challenges we face and the sacrifices that are needed.
I rise in support of the chairman's hard work on behalf of this bill, and I particularly appreciate the inclusion of the clear understanding that we have to face a direct threat to our national security and we have to do it by joining together and establishing a commonsense set of solutions to the problems now before us.
The Aviation Security Act the chairman has worked so hard on is the result of many years of his labors and understanding of the difficulties we confront. I certainly commend him and thank him for his hard work.
I also rise as a cosponsor of the Carnahan amendment to provide critical assistance to airline workers and those in aviation-related industries who were laid off as a direct result of the terrorist attacks.
At the time we considered the so-called airline bailout bill, many of us made very clear in our statements on the floor that we were disappointed that some concerns for the workers who were going to lose their jobs were not included in the bailout bill. We come today to reinforce our deep concern and to ask our colleagues to support the Carnahan amendment.
The numbers are overwhelming. We know that 100,000 workers have been laid off in the airline industry. At least 30,000 more have been laid off in airline manufacturing. We are concerned that if the American traveling public and visitors from overseas don't resume flying, as I urge everyone to do — I have flown numerous times already, and I encourage everyone to begin again to travel for business and pleasure — if for whatever reason that return to the air is delayed, then the numbers will undoubtedly grow.
Many of these airline workers are based in New York. They have been supporting our air transportation system out of JFK and LaGuardia. They have been literally handling some of the busiest air traffic corridors in the world. We know that reductions in flight schedules at both of these airports have put thousands of New Yorkers out of work: pilots and flight attendants, baggage and passenger service representatives. This has had a ripple effect throughout New York.
For example, in Syracuse, in upstate New York, a call center for US Airways that had been there for many years was shut down, throwing more than 400 employees out of work.
These airline and aviation-related industry layoffs are not just numbers. They represent the lives and livelihoods of hard-working Americans. I have heard many stories, as my colleagues have, of the hardships that are being imposed because out of the skies on September 11 came these dreadful, horrible acts of terrorism, where people who were willing to commit suicide brought about the deaths of thousands and thousands of our fellow citizens and people from all over the world and also wreaked havoc on our airline industry and the economy in general.
I hope as we consider this Aviation Security Act, for which I support and again thank the chairman and the ranking member, we will also support Senator Carnahan's amendment. Her aid package for dislocated workers is modeled after the successful trade adjustment assistance. It will allow airline workers to extend their unemployment insurance while they receive needed job training and support services or while, hopefully, they wait to be called back to work because we will all start flying again.
This amendment will also enable families to receive health care benefits as they go through this difficult period.
No story more sums up the anguish and pain of the losses we are discussing and the need to improve security than one that comes out of JFK. A TWA flight attendant at that airport received her furlough notice while awaiting news of her husband, a New York City firefighter missing at the World Trade Center. New Yorkers and Americans have paid a very heavy price. We are summoning our resolve. We are preparing our responses individually and throughout our Nation. We are following the leadership of our President. We are supporting our men and women in uniform.
I urge my colleagues to support the act that Chairman Hollings and Senator McCain have crafted and support the Carnahan amendment on which she has worked so hard to pay some attention and provide assistance to those Americans who woke up on September 11 thinking that it was any other workday and went to bed on that terrible day knowing that they might lose their jobs as a result of this horrific attack.
I thank my colleagues and yield back the remainder of my time.

Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.

Mr. President, I do not want to impinge upon the time of my good friend, Senator Rockefeller.

Mr. President, I rise again in support of the amendment offered by Senator Carnahan to provide immediate assistance to the over 100,000 airline workers and those in aviation-related industries who have been laid off and lost their jobs as a direct result of the terrorist attacks of September 11.
I just came from a very moving ceremony of commemoration at the Pentagon, where the lives of those military and civilian employees at the Pentagon, as well as the lives of the crew and passengers of the airplane that was mercilessly driven into the Pentagon, were honored.
I know we are working on other kinds of relief, and I am grateful to the President, the administration, and my colleagues for the work that is being done on the economic stimulus package and for the work that is being done with respect to unemployment insurance and dislocated workers' assistance, but I believe we have an obligation to move quickly with respect to the workers who have been laid off through no fault of their own or of their industry, and we cannot wait for the larger packages to be put together and negotiated.
Just as we must provide security to all Americans who are flying in our skies, we also should provide economic security to those who have supported us in the hundreds of thousands and millions of flights that were a matter of course before September 11. They were doing an important job in maintaining our free travel and supporting an important economic activity, and now they are confronting the cruelest kind of questions: How will they make their next car payment? How will they be able to afford the clothes their children might need? How will they know whether to go out and look for another job or hope and wait that business picks up on our airlines? I do not think we should be leaving our workers who have already been laid off. They need our help right now. I do agree we have to address the need to help all workers.
In New York, for example, the State labor department is estimating that 285,000 workers throughout New York will lose their jobs as a result of the attack we suffered. I do not think we should leave any of these workers behind. If we are trying to build confidence — confidence in consumers, confidence in citizens — then we should address the needs of those people who have been economically harmed by these attacks. I respect the work that others are undertaking. I will support that.
I ask this Chamber to send a message by voting in favor of Senator Carnahan's amendment that we are not going to just bail out airlines; we are not just going to protect the traveling public. We are going to help protect economically those who we hope will be back in the skies, back behind the counters, handling the baggage.
I met yesterday with a group of executives from the travel and tourism industry. Stories from them about the low occupancy rates, the fact that people are not traveling for business or pleasure, were very disturbing to me. Everyone knows we have real economic challenges. The last thing in the world we need is people who are scared to go about their daily business, who are scared to take that long-planned trip to Disney World, who are scared to fly across the country to show off their new baby to their mother or grandmother.
Until we can get that confidence up — and I applaud our wonderful leadership of Chairman Hollings and Ranking Member McCain on the aviation security bill — until we can get that confidence once again moving forward so people will fly, we can't turn our backs on those men and women who were the backbone of this airline industry.
I hope every Senator will support the Carnahan amendment and do everything possible to demonstrate our concern and commitment to those who were on the front lines and lost their jobs and livelihood because of the terrorist attacks.

The time of the Senator from Florida has expired in morning business.

